Welcome to the Huberman Lab Podcast,
where we discuss science and science-based tools
for everyday life.
I'm Andrew Huberman,
and I'm a professor of neurobiology and ophthalmology
at Stanford School of Medicine.
Today, we're talking all about fasting.
And anytime we're talking about fasting,
we are also talking about eating
because we all need to eat sooner or later.
We're going to talk about how fasting and when we eat
influences a large range of aspects of our health
and wellbeing, both physical and mental.
So while nowadays,
most people are familiar with the term intermittent fasting,
also sometimes called time-restricted feeding,
I think most people don't really understand
how that process works.
It's sort of obvious that intermittent fasting,
AKA time-restricted feeding,
involves eating at certain periods of each 24-hour cycle,
or maybe even not eating for entire days in some cases.
But if you think about it, everybody sleeps eventually.
And therefore, because people don't eat during their sleep,
almost everybody is employing some form
of intermittent fasting or time-restricted feeding.
What we're going to talk about today
is how particular schedules of time-restricted feeding
can impact our health in different ways.
And when I say different ways,
I mean, we're going to talk about how intermittent fasting,
AKA time-restricted feeding, impacts weight loss,
fat loss in particular,
muscle maintenance and loss and gain,
organ health, such as gut health and liver health,
the genome, the epigenome, inflammation, sickness,
recovery and healing from sickness,
exercise, cognition, mood, and lifespan.
So we're going to cover a tremendous amount of information.
I promise to make it all directly accessible,
regardless of whether or not you have a background
in biology and metabolic science or not.
I'm also going to talk about a lot of tools.
In fact, I'm going to discuss a number of tools
during today's episode that actually make it such
that you don't have to follow any feeding schedule
or fasting schedule, same thing if you think about it,
in any absolutely strict regimented way,
meaning if you were to only eat
during an eight-hour period of each day, most of the time,
but then occasionally eat
across a 12-hour period of the day.
In theory, that could actually have
pretty serious detrimental health effects.
And yet there are things that you can do
to attenuate those negative effects.
In fact, there are things that you can do and or take
that can make it as if you did not eat at all.
And so we'll discuss what those tools are.
And in many cases for sake of health, weight loss,
and performance,
making the body think that it did not eat at all
can actually be quite beneficial.
So today we're going to cover mechanism
and we're going to cover tools.
Before we do that,
I want to highlight a particular result
that was published recently
because it serves as a useful backbone
as we wade into the conversation about fasting.
This is a study that was published
in the journal Cell Metabolism,
a cell press journal, excellent journal.
And the title of the paper is Fasting Blood Glucose
as a Predictor of Mortality, Lost in Translation.
And I'll explain what the lost in translation part
means in a moment.
But the basic takeaway of this study,
and I should mention that the first author of the study
is Paliyaguru, P-A-L-L-I-Y-A-G-U-R-U, guru,
Paliyaguru et al.
The basic finding of the study is that in humans,
higher blood glucose is associated with mortality.
And in fact, if you look at blood glucose,
resting blood glucose across the lifespan,
what you find is as people age,
resting blood glucose goes up.
Now this is very interesting because for a long time,
it was thought that metabolism actually goes down as we age.
And to some extent that's true,
but the reductions in metabolism are not nearly as robust
as we once thought that they were across the lifespan.
However, unless there's something done to mitigate
the increase in blood glucose associated with aging,
almost everybody experiences a gradual,
but regular increase in resting blood glucose
that predicts mortality.
Now the title, as I mentioned,
is Fasting Blood Glucose as a Predictor of Mortality,
Lost in Translation.
And the reason that they included lost in translation
in the title is that what I just told you,
that increases in resting blood glucose predict mortality
or are correlated with mortality is true for human beings
and for non-human primates, monkeys,
but the opposite is true in mice.
And so I thought it was important to use this study
as an example of where studies in mice often,
but not always translate to humans and to non-human primates.
So today I'm going to be careful to distinguish
when a study was performed in mice versus in humans,
because it seems that at least when discussing feeding,
blood glucose and other aspects of diet,
as they relate to health and wellbeing,
whether or not a study was performed in rodents
or in humans can be very important.
In this case,
the results were directly 180 degrees opposite
to one another.
In other words, in mice, resting blood glucose went down
and it was associated with mortality.
So lower blood glucose associated with mortality,
whereas in humans,
higher resting blood glucose was associated with mortality.
And obviously what we're mostly interested in
is health and wellbeing of ourselves, of humans.
I'm sure there are some people out there
that are intensely concerned about the health
and wellbeing of mice,
which you could imagine a few rare contexts
where that's important,
but obviously most of us are interested in human health.
So I'll be sure to emphasize when studies were performed
in humans versus in mice.
Before we begin,
I'd like to emphasize that this podcast is separate
from my teaching and research roles at Stanford.
It is however,
part of my desire and effort to bring zero cost
to consumer information about science
and science related tools to the general public.
In keeping with that theme,
I'd like to thank the sponsors of today's podcast.
Our first sponsor is Roca.
Roca makes eyeglasses and sunglasses
that are the absolute highest quality.
I've spent a lifetime working on the visual system
and how we see.
And Roca, which is a company developed
by two all American swimmers from Stanford
has developed eyeglasses and sunglasses
that take into account the science of vision
and they've produced an absolutely terrific product.
That product involves glasses that,
first of all, are very lightweight.
Second of all, can be worn when performing any activity.
There really are performance eyeglasses and sunglasses.
So whether or not you're sweating or running around,
whether or not you're working,
whether or not you're hiking, cycling, et cetera,
you can wear them for essentially any activity.
The nice thing is they also have a great aesthetic.
So unlike a lot of other performance sunglasses
and eyeglasses out there
that can make people look more or less like cyborgs,
Roca eyeglasses and sunglasses look great
whether or not you're wearing them to dinner or at work,
or whether or not you're headed out for a run or a cycle
or something of that sort.
As I mentioned before, they're extremely lightweight.
They don't slip off.
And that's true regardless of what activity
you're engaging in.
If you'd like to try Roca glasses,
you can go to roca.com, that's R-O-K-A.com
and enter the code Huberman to save 20% off
your first order.
Today's podcast is also brought to us by InsideTracker.
InsideTracker is a personalized nutrition platform
that analyzes data from your blood and DNA
to help you better understand your body
and help you meet your health goals.
I've long been a believer in getting regular blood work done
for the simple reason that many of the processes
that are occurring in your body
that impact your immediate and long-term health
can only be assessed from a quality blood test.
And nowadays with the advent of modern DNA tests,
you can also assess your genome
and how that's impacting your immediate and long-term health.
The problem with a lot of blood and DNA tests
is you get information back,
but you don't know what to do with that information.
And InsideTracker has solved that problem.
They have a very easy to use dashboard
so that when you get your results back,
it will tell you, for instance,
if your levels of a particular metabolic factor
or hormone are too high or too low,
what you can do, what you can take,
how you can change your nutrition
in order to adjust those levels
and get them where you want them to be.
This is tremendously useful and takes all the guesswork
out of what to do with biomarker information.
If you'd like to try InsideTracker,
you can go to insidetracker.com slash Huberman
to get 25% off any of InsideTracker's plans.
Just use the code Huberman at checkout.
Today's episode is brought to us by Helix Sleep.
Helix Sleep makes mattresses and pillows
that are tailored to your unique sleep needs.
And in doing so, provide the best sleep possible.
I started sleeping on a Helix mattress
about a year or so ago,
and it is the best sleep that I've ever had.
If you go to the Helix site,
you take a brief two-minute quiz,
and that quiz asks you questions such as,
do you tend to sleep on your stomach, your side,
or your back, do you tend to run hot or cold
during the night, maybe you don't know.
And they match you to a particular mattress
that's ideal for your sleep needs.
In my case, I matched to the so-called dusk mattress.
I've been sleeping on a dusk mattress, as I mentioned,
it's absolutely terrific, best sleep I've ever had.
It's really key to get a mattress
that's best suited to you.
If you're interested in upgrading your mattress,
you can go to helixsleep.com, take that two-minute quiz,
and they'll match you to a customized mattress for you.
And you'll get up to $200 off any of your mattress orders,
and you'll get two free pillows.
If you're interested in Helix Sleep,
you can go to helixsleep.com slash Huberman,
and you'll get up to $200 off your mattress
and two free pillows.
I'd like to point you toward a valuable resource
that's also zero cost and is available now online.
This is an event that was recorded.
The event was held by Logitech,
and I was fortunate enough to partake in this event.
And the entire event was centered around
how to be a more effective learner and teacher
using the modern principles of neuroplasticity.
So at the link in the caption for this episode,
you can go to what was called the Rethink Education event.
And there, I gave a seminar of about 20 or 30 minutes
describing the modern neuroscience of neuroplasticity,
the nervous system's ability to change
in response to experience.
I focused mainly on human studies
and how different structures and different things
and tools that one can implement in the classroom
and outside of the classroom can lead to faster
and more pervasive, longer lasting learning of motor skills,
music skills, mathematical skills, language skills, et cetera,
all based on quality peer viewed research.
So if you'd like to check that out,
you can head to that link.
You'll also see an example of some of those tools in action
in a music classroom of a phenomenal music teacher,
Ben Edy, who's a teacher out in Pasadena,
who has applied these tools,
at least to my knowledge for the first time ever.
Of course, all the tools that are there are listed out
in what I call a plasticity super protocol.
And all those tools can be applied to learning and teaching
in any format that you like.
So check it out.
It's in the caption to this week's episode
and it will remain there.
It's up on YouTube and I hope you enjoy it.
Okay, so let's talk about feeding,
fasting, health, and performance.
And I want to just establish a few foundational terms
so that we're all on the same page.
First of all,
rather than talk about fasting or time restricted feeding,
I'm largely going to talk about time restricted feeding,
but please understand that time restricted feeding
is just one side of the coin that is a two-sided coin
that includes fasting on the one hand, not eating,
and time restricted feeding on the other hand.
I may occasionally say fasting,
but because fasting and eating establish
different biological conditions in the body,
time restricted feeding is the term that I will use
to describe the overall plan
of restricting one's eating window as it's called
to a particular phase of each 24 hour day,
or in some cases to particular days within the week,
because as you'll soon learn,
there are aspects of time restricted feeding,
AKA fasting, that involve eating every other day
or eating one way for five days
and then fasting for two days and so forth.
So I'll be very precise about what I mean
and why I mean it, but for the time being,
I'm going to refer to time restricted feeding
as a way to put an umbrella over this conversation.
Second of all,
I am going to emphasize a lot of biological mechanism.
If you've listened to this podcast before,
you know that I always begin with biological mechanism.
I do describe tools of how to implement those mechanisms,
but I wholeheartedly believe that knowing mechanisms
and understanding how these processes work
gives you tremendous flexibility and understanding
and control over the processes
of your mental and physical health.
Whereas if I were to just list off a menu of things to do
and not to do, those will work,
but those will not give you the kind of understanding
that would allow you to navigate through life,
through travel, through dinners out,
through different exercise schedules,
whether or not you're one age or another age,
male, female, et cetera,
I'm giving you mechanisms so that you can gain more control
over the systems in your brain and body.
Everything's timestamped,
so if you want to jump to the to-dos,
you can certainly do that,
but I encourage you to hang in there for the mechanism bit.
I will make it all very clear
because if you understand mechanism,
you are in a true place of power
and control over your biology.
If ever there was a topic that is controversial,
especially on the internet,
it is that of diet and nutrition.
So I'm wading into this with a smile
and in eager anticipation of all the,
but, but, but this, and but, but that, and wait,
but this showed that.
Here's the deal.
We need to precisely define what it is
that we're talking about when we talk about nutrition.
I'm going to give you an example of a study
that was published a few years ago, 2018,
by a colleague of mine at Stanford, Chris Gardner.
So a terrific professor of nutrition
and has done a lot of important studies
on how nutrition impacts different aspects of health.
This is a large scale study.
It was published in JAMA,
the Journal of the American Medical Association,
one of the very top tier journals in the area of medicine.
And certainly for a paper on nutrition to show up there
meant that it had to meet an exceedingly high standard.
This paper where Chris is the first author,
it's Gardner et al, 2018 JAMA,
looked at weight loss in people following
one particular diet versus another particular diet.
And this was a 12 month weight loss study.
So it was focused specifically on weight loss,
although they looked at some other parameters as well.
And the basic conclusion of the study was that
there was no significant difference in weight change
between people following a healthy low fat diet
versus a healthy low carbohydrate diet
with significantly more dietary fats in them.
This caused a lot of ripples in the world of nutrition
and nutritional science,
and certainly in the general population,
because anyone that understands diet and nutrition
would immediately say, but wait,
there are all sorts of different implications
of eating one type of diet,
say low carbohydrate, higher fats,
versus a higher carbohydrate, lower fat diet.
And indeed there are.
This study was focused specifically on fat loss
and on weight loss.
So as we discuss time restricted feeding,
we need to be very precise about what are the effects
of time restricted feeding and of eating in particular ways
at particular times,
we are going to emphasize again,
whether or not the study was done in mice or in humans,
in athletes and men and women or both.
But the study from Gardner and colleagues
is a beautiful study and really emphasizes that
if one's main goal is simply to lose weight,
then it really does not matter what one eats,
provided that the number of calories burned
is higher than the number of calories ingested.
However, anyone out there who understands
a little bit of biology or a lot of biology will agree
that there are many factors that impact
that calories burned part of the equation.
Some of those are obvious.
So for instance, amount of exercise,
type of exercise, basal metabolic rate,
how much energy one burns just sitting there.
I've talked before on this podcast about meat,
non-exercise induced thermogenesis,
where if people bounce around a lot and fidget a lot,
they can burn anywhere from 800 to 2000 calories per day.
So their quote unquote basal metabolic rate
is actually much higher simply because they're fidgeters.
Whereas people who tend to be more stationary
have a lower basal metabolic rate on average.
There's a great science to support this.
Metabolic factors and hormones are also very important.
Hormones such as thyroid hormone and insulin
and growth hormone and the sex story to hormones,
testosterone and estrogen,
those levels will also profoundly influence
the calories out the calories of burned component
of the calories in calories out equation.
So if out there on the internet
or in listening to a particular podcast or speaker,
somebody says, this is the ideal diet
or calories in calories out does not matter
or calories in calories out is the only thing that matters.
I think it's very important to understand
that there are some foundational truths
such as calories in calories out,
but that of course hormone factors
and the context in which a given diet regimen
is taking place are exceedingly important.
A good example of this would be puberty.
At that time in life,
sex story to hormones are changing profoundly in the body
as our growth hormone and other hormones.
And much of caloric intake
is directed towards protein synthesis,
towards the production of muscle and bone
and other tissues of the body.
And that's because of changes in hormones
that we call puberty.
So there's no way that we can drill into every aspect
of a given feeding plan or feeding schedule
that would allow us to tap into every aspect
of the list that I read out before weight loss,
fat loss, muscle, organ, genome, epigenome,
inflammation, exercise, cognition, mood, and lifespan.
But today we're going to be very precise
about how time restricted feeding.
It's very clear from both animal studies
and human studies can have a very powerful
and positive impact on everything from weight loss
and fat loss to various health parameters.
This is a beautiful literature that's emerged mostly
in the last 10 or 15 years.
And as we march into this literature,
what you'll see is that there actually is a perfect diet
for you on a given day.
And that perfect diet for you on a given day is contextual,
meaning it depends on what you did yesterday
and what you're going to do tomorrow.
So there is a perfect diet for you.
And today I'm going to arm you with the mechanisms
and understanding that will allow you to define
what that perfect diet is,
and will allow you to eat on a schedule
and to eat the things that are going
to best serve your goals.
So let's talk about eating and what happens when you eat.
And let's talk about fasting or not eating
and what happens when you fast.
I did an entire episode on eating and metabolism
and hormones and other factors that impact appetite.
We don't have time to go into all those details now,
although you're welcome to listen to that episode as well.
But we can briefly describe the overall conditions
that are set in the body when we eat and when we don't eat.
The key word here is conditions.
If I can emphasize anything today,
it's that what you eat and when you eat it,
set conditions in your body.
And those conditions can be very good for you
or very bad for you, depending on when you eat.
In fact, when you eat is as important as what you eat.
I'll repeat that.
When you eat is as important as what you eat,
at least as it relates to health parameters,
in particular, liver health and mental health.
Some simple rules about eating.
First of all, when you eat, typically your blood glucose,
your blood sugar will go up.
Also insulin levels will go up.
Insulin is a hormone that's involved in mobilizing glucose
from the bloodstream.
How much your glucose and insulin go up
depends on what you eat and how much you eat.
In general, simple sugars, including fructose from fruit,
but also sucrose and glucose and simple sugars
will raise your insulin and blood glucose
more than complex carbohydrates,
things like grains and breads and pastas and so forth.
And grains and breads and pastas and so forth
will raise your blood glucose more
than fibrous carbohydrates like lettuce and broccoli
and things of that sort.
Protein has a somewhat moderate or modest impact
on insulin and glucose.
And fat has the lowest impact
on raising your blood glucose and blood insulin.
So what you eat will impact how steep arise in blood glucose
and insulin takes place.
And there are a number of factors
that are related to your individual health
that will also dictate how steep and how high
that rise in glucose and insulin will be.
For the time being,
I'm leaving out people who have type one diabetes.
These are people that don't manufacture their own insulin
and type two diabetes is essentially insulin insensitivity,
lack of sensitivity to insulin,
which leads to high blood glucose.
But when you eat, blood glucose goes up
and when you don't eat blood glucose and insulin go down.
The longer it's been since your last meal,
the lower typically your blood glucose and insulin will be.
And the higher things like GLP-1,
glucagon like peptide one,
glucagon being a hormone that's also secreted
when you are in a fasted state or a low blood glucose state.
It's involved in mobilizing various energy sources
from the body, including fat through what we call lipolysis,
also using carbohydrates and potentially even using muscle
as a source of energy.
So that's kind of a fire hose of information
about what happens when you eat and don't eat,
but just think of it this way,
blood sugar and insulin go up when you eat,
they go down when you don't eat
and other hormones go up when you don't eat.
So there are hormones associated with the fasted state
and there are hormones associated with the eating
and having just eaten state.
Now, the most important thing to understand
is that like everything in biology,
this is a process that takes time.
So insulin and glucose go up when we eat
and it takes some period of time for them to go down.
Even if we stop eating,
they will remain up for some period of time
and then go back down.
It takes time.
This is very important because if you look
at the scientific literature on fasting,
on time restricted feeding,
it's absolutely clear that the health benefits,
not just the weight loss benefits,
but that the health benefits from time restricted feeding
occur because certain conditions are met
in the brain and body for a certain amount of time.
And that gives us an anchor from which to view
what eating is in terms of how it sets conditions
in the body over time.
And if that sounds overly analytic,
I promise you this is the simplest and best way
to think about any eating schedule or any eating plan.
So I think it's fair to say that in the field of nutrition,
there are a few landmark studies that serve
as really strong anchors for building our understanding
of what to eat and what not to eat and when to eat,
depending on our goals.
The Garner study that I mentioned earlier
is one such study in that it says,
if your goal is weight loss,
it really does not matter what foods you consume
provided that you consume a sub maintenance caloric diet.
However, I want to emphasize again,
that sets aside issues of adherence,
meaning how easy or hard it is to adhere to a given diet.
Some people find it much easier to follow a high fat,
low carbohydrate diet.
Some people follow a different diet
because it's much easier for them to follow.
And some people are concerned with mental performance
and athletic performance.
So that study doesn't say there's a best diet.
What it says is that what you consume is less important
than the amount of food that you consume,
at least for sake of weight loss,
not necessarily for sake of health.
Now, the study that I'm going to refer to next
is what I would consider the second major pillar
of nutritional studies.
This is a truly landmark study that was carried out
by Sachin Panda, who is a professor
at the Salk Institute of Biological Studies in San Diego,
an absolutely phenomenal institution
and an absolutely phenomenal researcher.
I've known Sachin for a number of years.
And I want to emphasize that the current literature
on intermittent fasting and time restricted feeding
can largely be attributed to Sachin
and the work that he's done.
There are others involved too, of course.
And of course, time restricted feeding and fasting
has a rich history that goes back many hundreds,
if not thousands of years in different cultures
and religions, but the science of time restricted feeding
can really mainly be attributed to the incredible work
that Sachin has done.
And I'm grateful to consider him a friend and a colleague.
And we consulted at length in anticipation of this episode.
I also hope to have him on as a guest in the future.
The landmark paper that came from Sachin's lab
was published in 2012.
This was a paper in mice that set the basis
for studies in humans that came later.
And the title of this paper is time restricted feeding
without reducing caloric intake prevents metabolic diseases
in mice fed a high fat diet.
So the title tells us a lot.
It says that what's varied in this study
is not what these mice ate.
It was when they ate it.
And there were essentially four conditions in this study
and the results are absolutely remarkable.
So I'm going to walk you through the major results.
What they did is they gave mice access
to different types of food.
There were four groups.
One group of mice had access to just a normal mouse diet.
It would not be a diet that you'd be very interested in.
I confess I've actually tasted mouse chow.
If you work with mice at all,
you just have to do it at least once.
It doesn't taste very good.
It tastes like a very bland graham cracker cookie.
And I confess that I only had the tiniest little bit,
but mice like that stuff.
And if you allow them to eat that stuff,
what's called ad libitum, whenever they want,
you just keep it in their food 24 hours a day,
they will eat sometimes,
and then they won't eat it at other times.
Or in this case, they also had a condition
where they gave them mouse chow in a time restricted way,
just for a certain number of hours each day,
about eight hours.
Or they gave them a high fat diet that was a separate group,
got a high fat diet at any time they wanted.
So this was kind of the carnival for mice
because mice really like high fat, highly palatable foods.
And so they got a lot of goodies and high fat in their food.
And then there was a fourth group that had access
to the high fat diet as much as they wanted to eat,
but only during a restricted time period
of each 24 hour cycle.
Now mice are nocturnal, humans are what we call diurnal.
Actually, we're not really diurnal, we're crepuscular,
which means that we're most active in the morning
and in the evening, not so much in the afternoon.
But nonetheless, everything I'm going to tell you
is true also for humans.
And we know this now from human studies.
One of the most important things to take away
from the study was that mice that ate a highly palatable,
high fat diet, a great tasting diet,
but only during a restricted feeding window
of each 24 hour cycle,
maintained or lost weight over time.
Whereas mice that ingested the same diet,
same amount of calories,
but had access to those calories around the clock,
gained weight, became obese and quite sick.
And as an additional second point,
the mice that restricted their feeding window
to a particular portion of eight hours
of every 24 hour cycle actually showed some improvement
in important health markers.
And what was even more incredible is that mice
that only ate during a particular feeding window
also experienced some reversal
of some prior negative health effects.
So this study really lit up the world
and got people excited about time restricted eating.
Again, they used an eight hour feeding window.
The story around that eight hour feeding window
is kind of interesting though.
Not many people know this
because it wasn't included in the paper
and there was no reason to include it in the paper,
not to out anybody,
but it turns out that the reason
they used an eight hour feeding window
and not a nine hour or a 10 hour feeding window
is because studies of this sort are actually quite demanding
to perform and require the constant presence
of the graduate student or postdoc there
to ensure that the food is in the cages at particular times
and not in the cages at other times.
And mice are really good at hiding food.
They'll even hide food in their jowls.
And so there's a lot of work that has to be done
to prepare for that eight hour feeding window
and to make sure after that eight hour feeding window,
there's all the food has been removed from the cage
and from the jowls of the mice and so forth.
And it turns out that the significant other
of the graduate student and or postdoc,
I won't reveal who they were running this study,
forbid their significant other, the scientist,
from being in the lab for periods of time
that were much longer than the 10 or 12 hours
that were required in order to ensure
this eight hour feeding window.
So when we hear the eight hour feeding windows are holy,
they are not holy.
And later we are going to talk about how eating for a time
that's restricted to eight hours versus 10 hours
versus 12 hours, for instance,
how that impacts various parameters like health parameters
and weight loss, et cetera.
But the eight hour feeding window was actually created
because of a real world constraint on the research
and the relationship with the researcher
performing the research,
not because there's anything holy
about an eight hour feeding window.
Now, an important point about when the feeding window falls
within the 24 hour cycle,
it is very important that the feeding window fall
during the more active phase of one's day.
So for humans, that's typically in the early part of the day
or the later part of the day, but not at night.
Put very simply, there are a lot of data now
pointing to the fact that eating during the nocturnal phase
of the 24 hour cycle is very detrimental to one's health.
In fact, when we eat can either enhance our health
or can diminish our health.
When we see light can enhance our feelings of wellbeing
or can diminish our feelings of wellbeing.
I've talked many times before about this
on the Huberman Lab podcast that during the daytime,
you want to get as much sunlight
and other types of bright light in your eyes
as is safely possible.
And then you want to avoid light
in the middle of the night.
It has detrimental dopamine lowering effects,
can cause depression, cortisol increases, et cetera.
So when you view light is as important
as the light that you view and when you eat
is as important as what you eat.
In this study, they saw something really interesting,
which was that not only did restricting food
to a particular phase of the 24 hour cycle
benefit things like lean body mass and fat loss
and a number of health parameters
that I'll talk about in a moment,
but it also anchored all the gene systems of the body
and provided a more regular stable
so-called circadian rhythm or 24 hour rhythm.
You may be surprised to learn that 80%,
80% of the genes in your body and brain
are on a 24 hour schedule.
That is they change their levels going from high to low
and back to high again across the 24 hour cycle.
And when those genes are high at the appropriate times
and low at the appropriate times,
meaning their expression is high and low
at the appropriate times,
and therefore the proper RNAs and proteins are made
because DNA encodes for RNA,
RNA is translated into proteins.
When that happens, your health benefits.
When those genes are not expressed at the right times,
when they're high or low at the wrong times
of each 24 hour cycle,
that's when you get negative health effects.
This study showed that when mice restrict their eating
to an eight hour period within the most active phase
of their 24 hour cycle,
many of the genes that are associated
with these so-called circadian and clocks,
these genes have names like per, bmal, cry1, et cetera.
Those so-called clock genes underwent
a very regular entrainment,
a locking in to the proper 24 hour schedule.
And while this was in mice,
we now know that this also occurs in humans.
I've said before on this podcast, and I'll say it again,
that light and when we view light is the primary way
in which these genes and the clock systems of our body
get organized or entrained,
meaning matched to the outside light dark cycle.
So viewing light early in the day and in the afternoon
and as much as possible all day, great.
Ideally that sunlight avoiding light in the middle
of the night is also great.
It's great because it causes the increases
in particular genes and the decreases in particular genes
in every cell throughout your body
at the appropriate times.
The second most powerful timekeeper or zeitgeber
as it's called is food and when you eat.
And in this study, the results they saw underscore
this point, what they saw is that the peaks
in these clock genes became very regular
and the dips in these clock genes became very regular.
And that led to a whole host
of really important positive health effects.
Conversely, when mice ate whenever they wanted
across the 24 hour cycle,
these clock genes became really out of whack
and the negative health consequences
were the downstream result of these changes
in these clock genes.
This has now also been shown to be true for humans.
So if you want to be healthy, you want your organ health,
your metabolic health to be entrained properly.
One of the most important things you can do is to view light
at the appropriate times of each 24 hour schedule
and to not view light at other times of that schedule.
And to eat at the appropriate time of each 24 hour day.
Now, again, there are rare instances
that we will discuss when skipping entire days
or entire 24 hour cycles of eating can be beneficial.
But for now, we're talking about schedules
of time restricted feeding that involve a window
of feeding that falls during your more active phase.
So during the daytime, putting aside people
that work shift work during the daytime
is when you want to eat.
And this eight hour feeding window provided a very strong
reinforcing signal that combines with light
to ensure that these genes are expressed
at the appropriate times.
The short takeaway from this is you probably want
to think about and perhaps even engage
in time restricted feeding.
So as I mentioned earlier,
when mice can eat around the clock, bad things happen.
And one of the bad things that happens
is that the liver suffers.
The liver is involved in all sorts of things,
production of important hormones
and other factors related to metabolism.
And when mice can eat around the clock,
their livers got very sick, fatty deposits in the liver,
other factors in the liver,
essentially taking down the pathway of liver disease.
The time restricted feeding essentially reversed that
or led in many cases to even healthier liver conditions.
And that's based on this study,
but also additional studies also now in humans.
So restricting your feeding to a particular window
every 24 hour cycle has clearly been shown now
in mice and in humans to enhance liver health,
which is wonderful.
How does it do this?
Well, it happens because food intake,
as I mentioned earlier,
sets certain conditions in the body
that lasts for a period of time.
Anytime we eat, whether or not we are a mouse or a human,
there's a period of time that's required
for so-called digestion,
but also gastric emptying and other processes related
to breaking down that food and utilizing it.
And that is an active process.
It requires energy.
And that process of breaking down food
involves certain cellular functions
that if they're ongoing throughout the 24 hour cycle
or even extended too far across the 24 hour cycle,
meaning you're eating across a 14 or a 16 hour
and 18 hour window that causes serious problems.
And this has now been established because of the fact
that it increases the expression of different proteins
and genes in the body, such as TNF alpha, IL-6, IL-1.
What are all those things?
They are pro-inflammatory markers.
So the reason that the liver gets sick
when you're eating too often
is because inflammatory markers are increased.
These inflammatory markers are not inherently bad.
They're there for a reason,
but they are there in order to respond
to certain challenges, immune challenges,
or the ingestion of food and the breakdown of food.
But then in an ideal circumstance,
they are reduced in the period
in which there's no food present in the digestive tract
or in which there's very little food present
in the digestive tract.
So by eating around the clock,
you're making yourself sicker.
By eating at restricted periods of time each 24 hour day,
you're actually making yourself healthier
and you're activating certain processes
that can positively impact both weight,
either maintenance or loss of weight.
We'll talk about weight gain a little later
and positively impacting things like liver health.
Also the expression of different things
related to brown fat,
the fat that increases your metabolism.
We will return to this also a little bit later
and blood glucose regulation.
So the takeaway from this study,
in fact, there are many takeaways from this study.
It's so wonderful is that liver health,
bile acid metabolism, energy expenditure,
inflammation, liver metabolites,
many, many aspects of our health
are impacted by when we eat, not just what we eat.
As we move forward and we talk about intermittent fasting
for eight hour windows, six hour windows,
12 hour windows for all sorts of different
intents and purposes,
I want to start to establish a foundational protocol
that all of us, any of us can use
in order to maximize your particular goals.
There are some absolutes within this realm
of time restricted feeding.
Here are a couple of absolutes
that you would want to consider.
First of all, it pays off in the metabolic sense
and in the health sense
and in the weight maintenance or loss sense
to not ingest any food in the first hour after waking
and potentially for longer.
So I want to repeat that.
One of the key pillars of intermittent fasting
is that for the first hour after you wake up
and potentially for longer to not ingest any food, okay?
The second major pillar that's well supported by research
is that for the two and ideally three hours
prior to bedtime,
you also don't ingest any food
or liquid calories for that matter.
And we will talk about what it means to break a fast
and whether or not certain liquids,
even coffee and tea can break a fast, et cetera,
in a few moments.
But just as a foundation,
it's very clear from the research in humans
that not eating any food or ingesting any calories,
liquid or otherwise,
for the first 60 minutes after waking up each day
and for the two to three hours prior to your bedtime,
that's ideal for the parameters
that we've discussed earlier,
all the different things like weight and liver health
and metabolic health and so forth.
The two most common questions about intermittent fasting
are when is the ideal time for the eating window?
Is it early in the day, the middle of the day,
or late or in the day?
And how long should that eating window be?
Should it be eight hours?
We already heard why the eight hour window
was first established.
It was because of these lab conditions
and the conditions of the particular relationship
of the graduate student involved,
or should it be seven hours or six hours or 12 hours?
Turns out that there's some general frameworks
that we can follow in order to answer these questions.
As we move into this portion of the discussion,
I want to highlight a very important reference
that just came out, literally came out last week
in the journal, endocrinology reviews.
And the title of this review is time restricted eating
for the prevention and management of metabolic diseases.
Although the data in this paper
go well beyond metabolic diseases.
This is a paper from Sachin Panda's lab.
It's a very lengthy review with an enormous table
that's beautifully organized,
that scripts out all the studies done in humans,
well over a hundred studies,
looking at time restricted feeding in athletes,
men, women, children, diabetes, no diabetes, et cetera,
with detailed references and description of the outcomes.
Spent a lot of time with this review,
even though it just came out recently,
and is a absolute goldmine resource.
It is also the major resource
for everything I'm about to tell you
if you would like to delve deeper into the material.
So let's deal with this first question
of when is the ideal feeding window?
And here again, we're thinking about a schedule of eating
that involves eating at least once every 24 hours,
not two day or three day or every other day fast.
So it turns out that the answer to the question,
when is it best to eat, is actually best answered
by thinking about the other side of the coin,
which is when is it best to fast?
So because we are fasting during sleep,
it's very clear that it's best to extend
the sleep-related fast either into the morning
or to start it in the evening.
Now, this might seem kind of obvious,
but it's actually not so obvious.
You could place that feeding window early in the day,
middle of the day, or late in the day.
Let's think about what happens when we sleep.
When we sleep, our body undergoes a number
of different processes in the brain and body
in order to recover the cells and tissues.
Many of you have probably heard of autophagy,
which is essentially a cleaning up, a gobbling up
of dead cells and cells that are injured or sick.
And this is a natural process that occurs,
and it occurs mainly during sleep,
although not only during sleep.
Fasting of any kind does tend to enhance autophagy.
It is not the only way to create autophagic conditions.
Autophagic conditions can be created simply
by following a sub caloric diet.
And there are other things that one can do
in order to trigger autophagy,
but fasting does trigger autophagy.
So when we're asleep,
the bad cells are getting gobbled up and eaten,
and the good cells also are undergoing
certain repair mechanisms mainly related to,
or at least governed by those circadian genes
that we talked about earlier, those clock genes.
So you're already fasting when you're asleep.
And how deep you are into that fast depends
on how long it was since your last meal.
So if you fast early in the day
and you've been asleep for five, six, seven, eight hours,
I would hope somewhere between six and eight hours
for most people is going to be beneficial.
When you wake up, I mentioned earlier
that you don't want to eat
for at least the first 60 minutes after waking,
but were you to extend that fasting to say 9 AM, 10 AM,
11 AM, or even 12 noon or later,
you are taking advantage of the deep fast
that you were in during sleep
and certainly toward the end of sleep.
Now, why do I say deep fast?
Well, because when we eat,
the clearance of that food from our gut
and the processes in our cells and organs
that are related to digestion
and the utilization of that food
takes about five to six hours.
So if you eat a meal and that meal lasts 10 minutes,
20 minutes, or 30 minutes, or even an hour,
and then you stop eating, you've stopped eating,
but you are not fasting at that point.
You can say you're fasting
because you're no longer putting food
into your digestive tract,
but you are not in a fasted state.
You are not under conditions of fasting.
Later, I'll talk about things that you can do
to accelerate the transition into fasting.
So one thing is certain that you want your eating window
to be tacked or attached to your sleep-based fasting
in a way that makes it easier for you
to get into the fasted state for a period of time.
So we can view that point
from the perspective of best, better, and worst, okay?
So if you are like most people and you sleep at night,
you're waking up somewhere around 6.37 AM
or maybe even 8 AM,
let's say you were to push your fasting window out
such that you started eating at noon
and then you stopped eating at 6 PM.
Well, then you're not eating from 6 PM
until let's say your bedtime is 10 PM,
but from 6 PM to 10 PM,
your body is not yet in a fasted state
because you just ate.
However, you're starting to taper into a fasted state
before sleep and then all through sleep
and until the next morning and late morning,
you are actually in a fasted state.
Now, most people find it very hard
to only eat in the middle of the day.
So while that's best,
it's ideal for sake of the fasting-related improvements
in health, it is not ideal
and it's not very applicable
to most work and family and social situations.
Most people eat breakfast with others
and or eat dinner with others.
Some people eat lunch with others,
but in general, it's hard to restrict your feeding window
to just the absolute middle of the day.
But from a purely health perspective,
in a very objective way, that would be the ideal situation.
Let's imagine a different pattern of eating
where the feeding window starts in the afternoon,
starts around two or even 3 PM.
Some people don't have much trouble
or they can train themselves to get their feeding window
out to two or 3 PM
and then they will eat until 10 or 11 PM, right?
If you do the math,
you realize that that feeding window is still pretty short.
It still constitutes what we would call intermittent fasting
or time restricted feeding.
But assuming that they go to bed around 11 PM or midnight,
they are not actually fasted in sleep
because for the first six hours or so of sleep,
maybe five, but probably more like six hours of sleep,
they're still digesting the food
that they consumed late in the night.
It does appear beneficial to grab ahold of
that sleep related fast,
meaning you don't want your feeding window
to be too close to bedtime.
And that's why we came up with this
kind of foundational pillar
that I discussed with Sachin earlier,
which is at least no eating for the first hour after waking,
but also no eating within two to three hours prior to bed.
And because we all need to sleep
and sleep is exceedingly important
for our health of all kinds,
you want to prioritize sleep,
but because we also have to eat,
then you start to think about this
and maybe it's not so good
to push that feeding window too late in the day,
because when you go to sleep,
you're not actually capitalizing
on the sleep related fasting.
Now it's not just the case
that it's easiest to fast while in sleep,
although that's true because when we're asleep,
typically we're not hungry or looking for food
or foraging for food or wanting food
or trying to resist food, we're just sleeping.
There is something special about the fasting
that occurs during sleep because it's associated
with a number of processes
that relate to the so-called glymphatic system,
the movement of lymph-like fluids
and other fluids through the brain
are kind of sweeping out a garbage disposal, if you will,
a clearing out of the metabolic debris
and some of the autophagy that's associated
with bad processes in the brain.
So we could do a whole episode on this,
but essentially during sleep
and in particular during fasted states of sleep,
we are undergoing a number of automatic cellular processes
that clear out debris from our brain,
enhance cognition, or at least offset dementia,
this is now well-established,
as well as a number of the same processes
occurring in the organs of our body.
So what we're starting to see here
is that there are a number of constraints
on when you can eat.
Now I would be remiss if I didn't acknowledge
the social constraints and the real life constraints.
Some of us, because we want to eat with our family
and because our family or our significant others
eat around eight or 9 p.m.
and that's the only time we're together,
you have to eat late in the day.
And that's certainly not a sin.
I'm not saying that's good or bad.
Here we're trying to establish, if you recall,
best, better, and worst.
So from both a practical and a health perspective
and a purely objective view
of how intermittent fasting works and can benefit us,
starting to eat each day somewhere around 10 a.m.
or around noon, and then allowing a feeding window
that goes until six or maybe 8 p.m.,
that seems to me, at least based on the data
and what I understand about typical cultures
where people eat in the daytime and in the evening,
that seems to me like the kind of schedule
that will allow you to get the most
out of intermittent fasting, time-restricted feeding,
but does not set you up to be really out of sync
with the social rhythms in most cultures.
If you think about it from the perspective of say,
a noon to eight feeding window,
what you'll find is that you're able to eat lunch
with others, if you like, or by yourself,
you will be able to eat dinner at a reasonable hour,
at least in most countries, in most cultures,
eating dinner somewhere between 6.30 and 7 p.m.
is typical.
When you say a feeding window that goes until eight,
that doesn't mean sitting down to dinner at eight.
That means your last bite of food or ingestion
of any liquid calories was at 8 p.m.
Assuming that you go to bed somewhere between 10 p.m.
and 1 a.m., that allows this tapering off
or this transition from feeding to a fasted state
and still allows you to capitalize on the special period
of fasting that is sleep-related fasting.
And again, I want to emphasize that the fasting
that occurs during sleep is vital
and eating too close to sleep will disrupt
that fasting-related sleep.
Now, there are a number of caveats
and details related to this,
and there's an important caveat and detail related
to people that are specifically interested
in increasing or maintaining muscle mass.
So first let's talk about food volume and food type
and how that relates to whether or not you quickly
or slowly enter a fasted state,
because clearly when we talk about a feeding window,
that feeding window could include any number
of different foods.
It could involve cake and ice cream, pizza, hamburgers,
plants, fruit, whatever it is,
or it could involve just fats or just proteins, et cetera.
There are at least three factors that are going
to govern how quickly you transition
from ingesting food to a fasted state.
Remember, as you ingest your last bite or sip of calories,
that's not when the fast begins.
That might be when the fasting begins on your watch
or on one of these apps that I'll refer to later,
which can help you track your fasting and eating windows,
but that's not when it actually begins
because your body is still seeing food.
You're actually carrying around food inside of you.
Even though you're not putting it into your mouth,
you're still eating in some sense.
So it should be somewhat obvious that very large meals
are going to take longer to digest than very small meals.
So that will impact how slowly or quickly you migrate
from a fed state to a fasted state.
There's no way I can spell out what exact volume of food
you should ingest based on the size of your stomach
and et cetera.
But you're all familiar with being extremely full,
very full, comfortably full, somewhat full,
or not feeling full and feeling hungry.
So learning to gauge food volume is important.
Also foods that include some fats or a lot of fats
will tend to slow gastric emptying time.
And depending on the kind of fats,
it could mean that a given meal is digested
within three hours versus five hours.
So more fats might be a large meal with a lot of fats
has been going to take five or six hours.
A smaller meal with less fat is going to be digested
more quickly.
Consuming calories in liquid form is going to mean
that gastric emptying time is going to be faster.
And then of course,
there's the glucose and the insulin aspect to it,
which is that foods that lead to big steep rises in glucose,
like pure sugars, then your glucose will drop.
However, if they're combined with fats,
then it tends to be a more gradual rise in glucose
and it's more sustained, et cetera.
Fibrous foods will also create a more long lasting
sustained release in glucose.
The important thing here is to establish a feeding window
that you can comfortably manage, okay?
Meaning that on average,
you can obey a six hour feeding window
or an eight hour feeding window or a 10 hour feeding window.
And then to place that feeding window in a social
and life context that you can manage on a regular basis.
Now there are two key points that have been gleaned
from the scientific data about this feeding window
and when to place it.
And this is based on a really important experiment
that Satchin and his colleagues have been doing.
There's a website that they have,
a zero cost website called My Circadian Clock.
You can go to this website free of cost.
There are a number of important resources there,
but what they've done is they've examined
the feeding behavior of thousands of people.
People will take a picture of the food they're about to eat
and it enters into their account,
maybe your account if you create one on My Circadian Clock.
And they do this over many days or weeks.
What's great about this is it establishes
what's essentially called a phytogram,
a time in which people ate.
And a number of important findings have emerged
from these phytograms across large populations
of people in different time zones
with different schedules, et cetera.
First of all, almost everybody underestimates
their feeding window.
Meaning people who think that they are
on an eight hour feeding window or six hour feeding window,
when their data are analyzed,
it almost is always the case
that they're actually on a feeding window
that's one or even two hours longer than they think.
You think, well, how could that possibly be?
If people are taking their first bite at noon
and they're taking their last bite at 8 p.m.,
well, that must mean that they are on that feeding window
of eight hours.
And it turns out that people cheat,
but they don't cheat in any kind of obvious way.
They might have, you know, a glass of wine after dinner,
or they'll have a cup of tea and a little bite of a cookie.
And so when people are honest and they are honest
in most cases for this experiment,
what you find is that most people's eating window
is actually quite a bit longer.
So in discussing this with Sachin
and reviewing the literature,
it's clear that if you'd like to be
on a 10 hour feeding window,
that you should probably select an eight hour feeding window
because there's always a little bit of a taper
on either side of that eating window.
Very few people are extremely strict
about these eating windows.
It's just hard to do in the context of life events
and social gatherings and family and so forth.
Okay, so as we build forward your ideal fasting
slash time restricted feeding schedule,
we now have several different rules that we can list out.
First, at least no food for the first hour after waking up,
at least one hour.
Two, no food intake for two
and ideally three hours prior to your bedtime.
Three, if you want to select an eight hour feeding window,
then you should probably focus
on a six or seven hour feeding window
because in reality your feeding window
is going to be longer.
Reality meaning real life constraints.
And if you'd like to be on a 10 hour feeding window,
you should probably select an eight
or a nine hour feeding window
because the way it plays out is that people
almost always eat outside of their eating window somewhat.
The other nice thing about selecting
a slightly shorter eating window
than is comfortable for you
is that it takes into account
that as you take your last bite
or your last sip of calories,
there's this time or taper
before which you are actually in a fasted state.
And because you're eating different things
on different days presumably,
some foods leave your gut more quickly,
some things spike your insulin
and your glucose more than others.
Sometimes you eat more fat, sometimes less fat.
This allows you to fall well within the margins
of the benefits of time restricted feeding
that have been demonstrated in humans,
which generally involve an eight hour window or so.
So I think this eight hour window
or six hour window is a good thing
to shoot for for most people.
Some people, and we will discuss the exceptions,
but some people truly are exceptions to this.
They just require more food.
And along those lines,
I just now briefly want to touch on some of the studies
that have looked at using a very short feeding window
of about four hours.
Nowadays, a number of people are doing
the so-called one meal per day
or are restricting their feeding window
to just four hours or six hours.
And that turns out to be an interesting strategy.
And the data around it actually are a little bit surprising.
One surprising thing to leap out
of this massive literature review
on time restricted feeding in humans
is that relatively short feeding windows
of say four to six hours
do produce a number of positive health effects,
things like increased insulin sensitivity,
which we know is good.
Remember type two diabetes is a reduction
in insulin sensitivity,
improvements in beta cell function and the pancreas,
decreased blood pressure,
decreased oxidative stress,
decreases in things like evening appetite.
So positive health effects
and psychological effects in general.
However, they either produce no change in body weight
or they tend to produce even increases in body weight.
Now, of course, there's variation between individuals
and between studies,
but this is somewhat surprising.
So the eight hour feeding window
seems to be very beneficial
across almost all the parameters that we've discussed,
inflammation, weight loss, fat loss, et cetera.
And adherence, I should mention,
people's ability to stick to the diet
seems quite good on this eight hour feeding windows.
But when people try and undergo
very short feeding windows of four to six hours,
it seems that they are overeating
in that four to six hours,
at least overeating with respect to their metabolic needs.
Now, the contrast to this
is the so-called one meal per day schedule.
Very few studies on one meal per day.
One meal per day, unless it's a very, very long meal,
a sort of feast,
typically would not last four to six hours,
because it sort of depends on how you define a meal.
But when you look at the very few,
I should emphasize again,
very few studies on one meal per day,
people typically maintain or lose weight
on the one meal per day schedule.
So what we can say
is that the seven to nine hour feeding window
produces all of the major health benefits
of time-restricted feeding,
as well as being pretty straightforward
for most people to adhere to on a regular basis.
And on a regular basis turns out to be very important.
I'll get back to that point in a moment.
Whereas the four to six hour eating window
doesn't seem to serve people
as well as say a seven or eight hour eating window,
simply because people are overeating
during that eating window.
And the one meal per day,
while perhaps ideal for certain people's schedules,
may actually cause people to under eat.
And in some cases that might be what people want.
They actually want to under eat.
But when we start thinking about performance
in work and in sport,
and when we start considering hormone health
and hormone production, fertility,
that's when we can really start to look at
the seven to nine hour feeding window
versus the four to six hour feeding window
versus the one meal per day type feeding window
with some different objectivity.
We can start to look at it through a different lens,
because it turns out that when you place the feeding window
and how long that feeding window is
actually will impact a number of other things
in particular hormones that can be very important
for a number of things related to sex and reproduction
can be related to performance at work,
performance in athleticism.
And there are excellent studies on this.
So let's explore those now.
So let's talk about some conditions
where having the feeding window early in the day
would actually be very beneficial.
There was a study that was published recently
in Cell Reports, again, Cell Press Journal,
excellent journal, peer reviewed, very stringent
from Aoyama et al.
So this is A-O-Y-A-M-A et al.
This was published just recently in July, 2021
that looked at the distribution of protein intake
in different meals delivered either early in the day
or later in the day.
And I'm summarizing here quite a lot,
but I should mention that this study was performed
in both mice and humans, same paper, mice and humans,
and involved hypertrophy training,
essentially increasing the weight bearing of given limbs
to try and induce hypertrophy,
which is the growth of muscle tissue.
It does appear that muscle tissue is better able
to undergo hypertrophy by virtue of the fact
that there's better or enhanced protein synthesis
early in the day because of the expression
of one of these particular clock genes called BMAL, B-M-A-L.
BMAL regulates a number of different protein synthesis
pathways within muscle cells,
such that eating protein early in the day
supports muscle tissue maintenance and or growth.
And in this study, they also looked at the effects
of supplementing so-called BCAAs, branch chain amino acids,
which is popular in bodybuilding circles
and in strength training circles.
And BCAAs are essential components
of a number of different foods,
but can also be supplemented.
The takeaway of this study is pretty straightforward.
However, the takeaway is if your main interest
is maintaining and or building muscle,
then it can be beneficial to ingest protein early in the day.
You would still want to obey this,
what we're calling a kind of foundational rule
of not eating any food for the first hour post-waking,
or at least the first hour post-waking.
And the cutoff for when you would want to eat protein
would be sometime before 10 AM.
And there I'm averaging across
a number of different situations.
But in general, this BMAL expression is such that,
let's say you wake up at 7 AM,
your main interest is in hypertrophy
or maintenance of muscle.
Then you would want to ingest some protein
sometime before 10 AM.
But obviously if you're interested in getting
the health effects of intermittent fasting,
that you wouldn't ingest any food
for at least the first 60 minutes upon waking.
Now it's not as if at 1001 AM,
a gate slammed shut and you can't generate hypertrophy.
Of course, that's not the case.
However, it's very interesting that it doesn't matter
when the resistance training,
the load bearing exercise occurs in the 24 hour cycle.
So whether or not, in other words,
people are training early in the day
or they're training late in the day,
it still appears that ingesting protein early in the day
favors hypertrophy or that one is better,
or I should say more easily able to access hypertrophy
by way of these clock regulated protein synthesis mechanisms
by ingesting protein early in the day.
In no way, shape or form does this study say
that ingesting protein later in the day
is somehow bad for you.
It just emphasizes the positive effects
of ingesting protein early in the day
for sake of muscle maintenance and or hypertrophy.
So if you're somebody who's mainly concerned
with muscle maintenance and hypertrophy,
then it may make sense to move that feeding window
earlier in the day.
And certainly there are people out there
who are interested in muscle maintenance and hypertrophy
who aren't doing intermittent fasting at all.
And that's also perfectly fine,
but this just so happens to be an episode
about intermittent fasting and time restricted feeding.
There are of course modes of eating
where one eats small meals spread throughout the day
or weights meals differently,
such that meals early in the day
are larger than later in the day or vice versa.
There are a near infinite number of ways to organize this.
But if you are somebody who's interested in deriving
the many clearly established health effects
of time restricted feeding,
and you are somebody who would like to maintain
or build muscle,
then ingesting proteins in the early part of the day
would be important to you,
at least on the basis of these results.
And therefore that eight hour window
that we've established as more or less ideal
shifted to the later part of the day
might not be as beneficial for you.
Now, I can just personally say that for me,
when I wake up in the morning,
it's very easy for me to not eat until noon
or one or 2 p.m.
Eating early in the day is actually somewhat of a challenge.
I discussed this point with Sachin
because we were talking about
how is it that one can move their feeding window
or place themselves onto a different schedule
of intermittent fasting.
And it's very clear that one needs to provide
a transition period in order for that to happen.
You should allow yourself a transition period
of anywhere from one week to 10 days
in which you shift your feeding window
by about an hour each day or so.
And then once you establish a feeding window
that feels comfortable for you
and that you think you can maintain over time,
that you simply maintain that feeding schedule
for at least 30 days,
but ideally you would do that indefinitely.
Now, this turns out to be important
based on data that they've gleaned
from this my circadian clock,
massive experiment that they've been doing
where people are entering the times
that they're feeding and eating.
Excuse me, anytime we talk about mice,
I always think about feeding
because I come from a background
and my lab works on both laboratory mice and on humans.
Anytime I think about humans, I think about eating,
but of course they are the same thing.
The interesting thing to emerge
from that very large data set in humans
is that when people log their feeding times,
as I mentioned before,
oftentimes they think they're eating in an eight hour window
but they are actually eating in a much broader window.
However, even for people that are very good
about restricting their feeding
to a four or six or eight hour window,
if they're very strict about the start and stop times
when they ingest calories,
one of the findings that's really been important to note
is that almost every individual has a lot of drift
in when that eating window resides in their 24 hour period.
In particular on the weekends,
people are either extending or shifting their feeding window
in a way that makes it seem
that they've traveled to another time zone
and are eating according to another time zone.
And this is extremely important.
As I mentioned earlier,
based on the 2012 study from Sachin's lab,
we're eating at a particular phase of each 24 hour cycle
can help enhance the expression of these clock genes.
If you are eating within a very strict
or semi-strict feeding window,
but that feeding window is migrating around
from day to day or five days a week,
you're really organized about when that falls,
let's say for sake of example,
from noon to 8 PM, noon to 8 PM,
Monday, noon to 8 PM, Tuesday, Wednesday,
noon to 8 PM, Thursday, and so forth.
But then on a Saturday, it's becoming 11 AM
and you're ending it early,
or perhaps you're starting early in the day on Sunday,
you're having brunch that starts at nine 30 or 10,
and then it's extending out still just eight hours,
but it's shifting around.
That can cause disruptions
in these circadian clock mechanisms
that cause disruptions in the downstream effects of eating
that are taking at least two to three days to recover from.
So obviously we don't want to be overly neurotic
about this stuff,
but because this is an episode about the science
of intermittent fasting and time restricted feeding,
as important as how long your feeding window is,
is where that feeding window resides in each 24 hour cycle.
And perhaps even more important than that
is that it be fairly regular
where that feeding window resides,
because even if you have a very short feeding window,
if it's drifting around from day to day,
that actually offsets a number
of the positive health effects of intermittent fasting.
So to really just underscore the way
that these different pieces
of the biological puzzle fit together,
if you are very strict or semi-strict
about your eight hour feeding window,
but on the weekends that eight hour feeding window
is falling later than it normally would
during the middle of the week,
it is as if you are going to bed later,
even if you're going to bed at the same time,
at least from the perspective of metabolic health,
because of the way that eating impacts these clock genes
and impacts, or I should say,
subtracts the sleep related fasting
that you would normally experience
if you were to finish eating
a couple hours before bedtime.
So again, we don't want to create any overly obsessive
or neurotic focus on this.
I think that most all people could benefit
from a time-restricted feeding schedule,
but they should really think hard
about what they can stick to on a regular basis
and understand that they tend to underestimate
the feeding window that they actually are partaking in,
and that they should place that feeding window
in a portion of the 24 hour cycle
that they can be consistent on most days.
And I want to emphasize most,
again, because we are not laboratory mice.
We don't have a graduate student
coming in for eight hours a day
because that's what their significant other
will allow them to do.
And then removing the food from our jowls
and from our cages,
we have access to food pretty much 24 hours a day.
Along those lines, however,
there are things that we can all do
that will allow us to offset some of the drift,
if you will, that we experience
or that we induce in terms of
when our feeding window occurs
or that the feeding window might push out a little later
and then therefore start a little later the next day.
There are things that we can do
and there are things that we can take.
And so I'd like to discuss those briefly.
So throughout this episode,
I've more or less been alluding to the fact
that when you eat,
there's some period of time afterwards
in which you're actually still eating,
at least from the perspective of metabolism,
because glucose is up, insulin is up,
and you're undergoing different metabolic
and digestive processes that don't really speak to you
being in a fasted state, right?
It's not just about when you take your last bite
or your last sip.
However, there are things that we can do
to accelerate the transition from a fed state
to a fasted state.
And so I'd like to discuss what those are.
And I want to emphasize that the term fed state
is probably a better way to think about it
than eating or not eating,
because we think of eating as the verb,
we're eating, we're eating, okay, we're done eating,
I'm fasting now,
but you're not actually fasting because you are fed.
So we should really think about fed and unfed states
because from a cellular processes perspective
and from a health perspective,
that's actually what your body and your system
are paying attention to.
And by now with everything that we've laid out,
I think that should be intuitive to understand.
So there's a fun and exciting concept related to this,
which is glucose clearing.
You may have heard the old adage
that if you take a 20 or 30 minute walk after dinner,
that it accelerates the rate at which you digest that food.
And indeed it does.
Clearing out of glucose from your system
can be accomplished through a number of different means,
but light movement or exercise
does increase gastric emptying time.
So for instance,
if you were to eat a meal that ended at 8 PM
and then plop to the couch, watch TV,
or get on your computer or go to sleep,
it would be five or six hours until you have transitioned
from a fed state to a fasted state.
However, you can accelerate that considerably
by taking a 20 or 30 minute, just light walk.
It doesn't have to be speed walking.
It certainly doesn't have to be jogging,
but just walking outside or moving around.
So glucose clearing is an important aspect of the transition
from the fed state to the fasted state.
And just a light walk can allow you to do that.
Now, if you can't get outside,
some people will go through the gymnastics literally
of doing things like air squats and pushups
and things like that.
And indeed those will increase the expression of things
like Glut4 and things that mobilize glucose into muscles
and things of that sort.
But, you know, under most conditions,
most people aren't doing pushups after dinner,
or certainly if you've had a big meal,
just taking a light walk can be beneficial.
In addition, you could consider doing intense exercise.
Now you wouldn't necessarily want to do that
immediately after eating.
So let's take a look at what high intensity training
of any kind does to blood glucose,
because in this case,
it turns out that when you do high intensity training
actually has opposite effects on blood glucose,
depending on whether or not you do it
early or later in the day.
So a fairly recent study looked at so-called HIIT training,
high intensity interval training,
which of course can take many different forms.
It can take the form of circuit training with weights.
It can take the form of, you know, burpees and pushups
and sprints and all sorts of different things,
but high intensity interval training is typically training
that gets people's heart rates up, you know,
well above 70% of maximum and then brief periods of rest
and then repeating and how long the high intensity interval
training of course will also vary.
There are very brief, you know,
six or 12 or 15 minute workouts.
Some people can carry on with high intensity interval
training for up to 45 or maybe even 60 minutes
in extreme cases.
But when you look at the studies that have explored high
intensity interval training and its effect on blood glucose,
there are a couple of studies that leap out.
For instance,
one that emphasize that blood glucose levels will actually
increase if high intensity interval training is performed
early in the day and will decrease if high intensity
interval training is performed later in the day.
Now the purpose for this exploration was not to explore
clearance of blood glucose for sake of intermittent
fasting.
It was mainly focused on athletic performance and whether
or not that was better early in the day or later in the day,
et cetera.
But we can extract some information from these studies that
are beneficial for sake of understanding glucose clearing.
If you have ingested food throughout the afternoon and
evening and late in the day,
and you're thinking about going to sleep and you'd like to
enter sleep in a way that is less fed and more fasted,
then engaging in high intensity interval training in the
afternoon will lower or evening,
I should say will lower blood glucose.
And in that way will help you accelerate your transition
into the fastest state provided you don't ingest something
after the high intensity interval training.
Now is the increase in blood glucose that occurs from high
intensity interval training early in the day,
is that detrimental?
Not necessarily so that oftentimes is associated with the
shuttling of nutrients to the muscles that have just done a
lot of hard work.
So it's not that high intensity interval training should not
be done early in the day.
In fact, for many people,
including myself training early in the day,
just for the way that my psychology and biology works is
always better for me than training later in the day.
And the other important thing to mention is that high
intensity interval training done late in the day can be
beneficial from the perspective of glucose clearing,
lowering blood glucose and helping transition from the fed
to the fasted state in preparation for sleep.
However, if you're ingesting caffeine or anything to engage
in that high intensity interval training in a way that
prevents you from getting to sleep, well,
then it's going to be detrimental overall.
So the reason I mentioned this is of course,
because it's nice to know that light walks after dinner or
any other meal for that matter or high intensity interval
training provided it's done in the second half of the day,
can lower blood glucose and speed the transition from fed to
fasted states.
But I also mention it because what we are really trying to
achieve when we partake in intermittent fasting,
so-called time restricted feeding is what we're really
trying to do is access unfed states or fasted states.
It's not really about when you eat and what you do.
It's about extending the duration of the fasting period,
as long as you can,
in a way that's still compatible with your eating, right?
Not the other way around.
And this gets back to this key feature of our biology,
which is that what we eat, when we eat, when we exercise,
when we view light,
it's about setting a context or a set of conditions in your
brain and body.
So it's not so much about the activities that you undergo.
It's about the activities you undergo and their
relationship to one another over time.
And so in this way,
it really beautifully highlights the way that your biology is
interacting all the time.
Light is setting when you're going to be awake and when
you're going to be asleep,
when you eat is going to be determining when you're going to
be awake and when you're going to be asleep and when you eat
is also going to be determining when you are able to clear
out debris from your brain and body and repair the various
cells and mechanisms of your body,
when you're able to reduce those inflammatory cytokines
throughout your body.
And this is really the beauty of time-restricted feeding,
which is it's not really about restricting your feeding.
It's about accessing the beauty of the fasted state.
Now, there are other ways to clear out blood glucose that
involve supplements or prescription drugs.
These are so-called glucose disposal agents,
glucose disposal agents, such as metformin,
which is a prescription drug or berberine,
which is an over the counter substance will lead to very
dramatic reductions in blood glucose.
And so they shift you from a fed to a fasted state.
And I know many people who take berberine before eating
meals that include a large number of carbohydrates,
for instance, as a way to clear out glucose.
Now I've tried berberine before.
And what I can tell you is that if you take berberine,
which by the way is very much like metformin,
its effects are almost identical to metformin in fact,
but it's much less expensive and it's over the counter.
If you take berberine and you have not ingested
carbohydrates, many people, including myself,
experience a splitting headache.
You become hypoglycemic because it is a glucose clearing
agent.
So if you're going to experiment with things like metformin
and or berberine or similar,
you want to be very cautious that you're not clearing out
blood glucose that's already low.
And the dose response for this varies tremendously from one
individual to the next.
And there's a strong circadian component.
So some people react very well to berberine early in the
day, but find that later in the day,
it provides extreme headaches for some people,
it's the opposite.
So I caution you in exploring things like berberine and
metformin that you should expect to experience a number of
physical and psychological effects that may work for you,
might be great for you, but might also not be great for you.
Nowadays,
there are a number of commercially available continuous
glucose monitors.
I've tried one of these.
It involves putting what's essentially a patch with a little
needle that goes into your skin,
which is continuing continually, excuse me,
monitoring your blood glucose.
And you can look at it at an app on your phone.
And you can learn a lot that way about how different foods
impact the increases and decrease in blood glucose.
If you're doing experiments with berberine or metformin,
you can see how those impact your blood glucose.
You can see how exercise hit training or otherwise impact
impacts blood glucose.
Excuse me again.
It's very hard to assess blood glucose without a continuous
blood glucose monitor.
And if you're not using one,
you're mainly going to be relying on subjective things like,
oh, I feel like I have low blood sugar.
I feel shaky.
Like I have high blood sugar or shaky.
Cause you have low blood sugar.
So I have to say that glucose clearing agents that involve
a walk or exercise moderate or intense are going to be a lot
easier to titrate and adjust the levels of than things that
you're going to take where you have to ingest the dosage.
And then once you ingest a certain dosage,
you're along for the ride,
at least until the effects of that particular compound wear
off, it doesn't mean those things don't have utility.
It doesn't mean people aren't using them because many
people are,
but they are potentially a very sharp blade.
That is a double sided blade.
So I encourage you to approach those with caution.
If you decide to at all,
it's worth thinking about what the low blood glucose state
is and why it's beneficial as well as why it might produce
headaches.
And in some cases can also adjust the effects of other
hormones in the fasted state.
A number of different proteins that are expressed in cells
undergo changes in their expression.
We talked about this earlier.
When we are fasted,
we tend to reduce the activity of a particular protein
called mTOR mammalian target of rapamycin mTOR is very
active in cells while they are growing.
So throughout development,
it's also very active in cancers of various kinds.
mTOR needs to be what's called phosphorylated.
If you don't know what that means, don't worry about it.
But phosphorylation is a manner in which certain proteins
are altered so that they can actually be functional within
cells.
mTOR is associated with cell growth of all kinds,
healthy and unhealthy.
When mTOR is phosphorylated, there's a marker called PS6.
So phospho mTOR expresses PS6.
If this is all escaping you, don't worry about it.
Phospho mTOR and PS6 are reduced by fasting.
Now this makes sense if you think about it,
because eating and growth are associated with each other.
Fasting is not necessarily anti-growth,
but it is not pro-growth.
And when we fast, we see increases in cells of things like
AMPK, the sirtuins, things like transcription factors,
like FOXO, ATF and ketones or ketone bodies.
You may have heard of the ketogenic diet.
What's the point of all this biochemistry.
It's not to just blitz you with a bunch of cellular biology
and biochemistry.
It's to say that we have cell growth pathways involving
mTOR and PS6, and we have cell repair
and cell shrinkage processes that are associated with AMPK,
the so-called sirtuins,
which Dr. David Sinclair from Harvard and others are famous
for discovering and understanding things like AMPK.
These two different divergent pathways of cell growth
and cell breakdown and repair.
And by breakdown, I mean actual clearance,
autophagy and repair.
Those can be triggered by being in either the fed
or the fasted state.
So one way I'd like you to think about the fed state,
not just eating, but having recently eaten
or the fasted state, meaning high blood glucose
and or you've recently eaten or are currently eating
or drinking calories is that when you eat
or when you don't eat, when you're fed,
when you're fasted,
you are either promoting cellular growth of all kinds
or you're promoting cellular repair
and clearance of all kinds.
And so, again, this is about setting conditions
in the brain and body.
It's not so much about when you eat food A or B,
it leads to increases in mTOR.
Anytime you eat any food,
doesn't matter if it's plant-based, animal-based, fat,
protein, carbohydrate, doesn't matter.
You are biasing your system towards a biochemical state
of cell growth.
And anytime you haven't eaten for a while
or blood glucose is low,
you're biasing your system toward a state of cellular repair.
And this is why people who do not suffer
from any blood glucose regulation issues,
take things like berberine as glucose disposal agents
or take metformin.
I'm not necessarily suggesting that you do that,
but it's because those things mimic fasting.
They create situations in the body that promote things
like AMPK and the sirtuins and others to push your body
and your system down a route of repair,
even though you might've just eaten a meal an hour ago.
Along the lines of the health benefits
of intermittent fasting,
there are nice data showing improvements
in the gut microbiome.
And in particular,
in the treatment of irritable bowel syndrome
and other forms of colitis in time-restricted feeding,
meaning time-restricted feeding seems to be able
to assist people with those conditions
following the general parameters that I discussed before,
eight hours and so forth.
Why and how?
Well, by way of intermittent fasting,
impacting the expression of these various clock genes
and because the clock genes impact the mucosal lining,
the mucus lining of the gut,
it appears that intermittent fasting
can reduce the amount of so-called lactobacillus
that's present in the gut.
And lactobacillus is when in high levels is correlated
with a number of different metabolic disorders.
At the same time,
time-restricted feeding seems to enhance the proliferation
of some of the gut microbiota like oscillobacter
and some of the other ones
that promote healthy mucosal lining
and that promote better overall intestinal function.
So these are pathways that have now been established
and it appears that intermittent fasting
isn't just modulating these processes,
but is actually having a direct effect
on the mucosal lining in a way
that favors a healthier gut microbiome.
So it should come as no surprise
that many people who experience gut issues benefit
from restricting their feeding window
to eight hours or so per every 24 hour period.
The other very exciting finding about intermittent fasting
is one of the major health issues these days
is the proliferation of so-called
non-alcoholic fatty liver disease.
30 years or so non-alcoholic fatty liver disease
was exceedingly rare to see in the clinic,
except in alcoholics.
Fatty deposits in the liver are bad.
It is essentially liver disease.
Nowadays, children and adults are showing up
with non-alcoholic fatty liver disease.
Some of these people are obese, others are not,
but it's a serious health concern
and it's growing in numbers all the time.
A recent study that was published in Cell Reports Medicine
just a couple of weeks ago tested the hypothesis
whether or not the gut microbiome
or so-called brown fat tissue is impacting the liver health
and in particular non-alcoholic fatty liver disease.
The short takeaway from this study is that
contrary to what was previously thought,
the gut microbiome, while very important
for a number of other processes in the body,
doesn't seem to be related
to this non-alcoholic fatty liver disease.
This is surprising to people or should be
to those of you that have been following
the gut microbiome literature.
However, brown fat, which is a healthy fat
that we have between our two scapulae and in our upper neck,
it doesn't tend to be blubbery type fat pads,
but it sits deep to the skin,
but creates a thermogenic effect in the body
that is helpful for reducing the amount of other fat,
the type of fat that we're more typically used to thinking
about and talking about white fat and pink fat
that's subcutaneous fat around the abdomen and so forth.
Brown fat seems to have a direct correlation
with the lack of non-alcoholic fatty liver disease.
What this study showed was that
in people that have diminished concentrations of brown fat,
there is a higher probability
of having non-alcoholic fatty liver disease.
Now, the good news is brown fat stores can be increased.
And again, this isn't going to create blubber of brown fat.
This is going to create increased thermogenesis
and actually make people leaner.
And brown fat has a number
of other important positive effects.
Now, this is interesting because cold exposure
of anywhere from one to three minutes,
two or four times per week, or maybe even 10 minutes,
two to four times per week can increase brown fat stores.
Also time-restricted feeding has now been tied
to the density of brown fat stores.
So time-restricted feeding also seems
to positively increase brown fat stores,
probably because of the way that brown fat stores relate
to epinephrine and adrenaline,
which tend to go up when we're fasted.
What does this all mean?
This means for sake of liver health
and for sake of reducing or maybe preventing
or even potentially,
want to underline potentially reversing
non-alcoholic fatty liver disease,
time-restricted feeding also appears to be beneficial.
Many people out there are interested
in optimizing their hormones.
And as we mentioned earlier, insulin is a hormone
and time-restricted feeding seems
to have very positive effects
on overall insulin profiles and so forth.
But anytime you mention hormones,
people immediately seem to leap to the sex steroid hormones,
testosterone and estrogen,
because indeed they have powerful effects,
both in the short-term and the long-term in terms
of our mental and physical health and performance.
There's at least one study that's explored the effects
of time-restricted eating on performance,
athletic performance, immune function,
and body composition.
This was a study by Morrow et al
that was performed on elite cyclists.
So I want to point that out.
It was a randomized control trial,
but what's really nice about this study is
that it explored a number of different hormonal parameters
in people that were using time-restricted eating
or that had a more extended eating window.
And they tracked everything very carefully.
And the amount of food they were eating
was actually pretty considerable, 4,800 calories.
So that's a lot of calories,
but then again, they were very active.
And they've measured a number
of different things related to VO2 max, et cetera.
Performance and overall performance at what they did,
cycling is not the point that I want to emphasize here.
Although there were some positive effects
on their performance related to time-restricted eating.
The point I want to talk about relates to things
that presumably relate to most everybody,
which are the effects on things like glucose,
thyroid hormone, testosterone,
sex hormone binding globulin,
which can bind up testosterone and prevent
the so-called free form of testosterone,
which is the one that has most of the actions
in the brain and body.
And the major takeaway from this study
was that time-restricted feeding
of the same amount of calories
as the so-called control condition, okay?
Same calories, but either compact
throughout the 24 hour cycle to an eight hour feeding window
or allowing them to eat over a larger feeding window
did lead to significant decreases in free testosterone.
And I think a number of people will raise their eyebrows
to that and think, oh,
well then maybe time-restricted feeding is not for me.
There are a number of important considerations, of course.
One is while the decrease in free testosterone
was significant,
it's also going to depend on where people start out.
So if somebody has already low or modest levels
of testosterone and it drops by 10 or 20%,
that could lead them into a state of poor performance
and wellbeing.
Whereas if somebody has higher testosterone,
a decrease won't necessarily do that.
So it's important to take that into consideration.
This is why I'm always such a fan
of people doing their blood work
and knowing what's going on under the hood for them.
A very interesting change in hormonal profile
was cortisol, so-called stress hormone.
Cortisol, of course,
is also naturally released early in the day
in a healthy way to wake you up and promote alertness,
but you don't want its levels to be too high
or to have peaks in cortisol late in the day.
It's actually correlated with depression
and a number of other untoward things.
I would have thought that by restricting a feeding window
to a particular time each day,
that these hard training cyclists
would have undergone increases in serum cortisol.
And in fact, the opposite was true.
They had significant reductions in serum cortisol
as a consequence of time-restricted feeding.
I should mention there were significant reductions
in serum cortisol also in the control group,
but not to the same extent.
And the two groups did differ significantly
from one another.
Now, this is important because if you just look
at one hormone, testosterone, you'd say,
okay, based on these data, time-restricted feeding
is reducing testosterone levels significantly,
even though the number of calories is quite high
and is held constant across the study.
But in fact, because cortisol is lower,
it may mean that the effects of testosterone
or the reduction in testosterone is offset.
And that's because cortisol and testosterone
are always in this somewhat of a dance
in terms of cortisol inhibiting the effects
of testosterone largely and vice versa.
So it is interesting and important
to look at the total gallery of hormones.
And they did look at a number of hormones.
They looked at other inflammatory markers.
Those were not increased.
That's not surprising.
If you remember back to the 2012 Sachin Panda study,
this early pioneering study on time-restricted feeding,
they saw reductions in stress hormones
and in inflammatory markers
in time-restricted feeding mice.
And here, this also seems to be the case in humans.
So the takeaway is for sake of hormone health,
time-restricted feeding is compatible
with quality hormone health,
even in high-performing athletes.
Based on everything we know and that we've discussed,
I would not suggest that people restrict
their feeding window to less than eight hours,
especially if they're training hard on a regular basis.
And it's not just athletes that should pay attention to this
when we are working very hard,
when we are psychologically stressed,
when we are studying for exams,
or we are in conflict with somebody on a regular basis,
that creates a stress in the body
that's very similar to that of physical training.
The body and brain don't distinguish
between physical stress and mental stress.
It's all nervous system.
Remember that it's just cortisol and adrenaline.
There's no special hormone just for physical stress
versus psychological stress.
So again, in thinking about what sort of feeding window
will be right for you,
we arrive back at this eight-hour time bin
that seems more or less flexible for most conditions,
even high-performing elite athletes.
And I would say just by logical extension,
even for people that have a lot of stress in their life.
And I personally wouldn't suggest
that people who have a lot of stress in their life
or the potential for stress in their life
shorten their feeding window much shorter than eight hours,
because then you would expect
that you would start to increase
some of the inflammatory markers.
You would increase the stress hormones
and you would be decreasing things like testosterone
and estrogen and some of the sex steroid hormones.
So again, it's all about context and the eight-hour window.
It isn't holy, but seems to be a really useful guide
to extract the great health benefits
of which there are many and of which we've discussed
from intermittent fasting, time-restricted feeding,
and yet that it could still be compatible
with decent social schedules
and for maintaining hormone health.
In keeping with this,
for women that are trying to maintain ovulatory cycles
or for couples that are trying to get pregnant,
I think it's also important
to not create a feeding window that's too short.
The relationship between feeding and body fat stores
and glucose and leptin and hormones
is a well-established one.
And we can summarize it very easily here,
although I've done several episodes
related to this previously on optimizing hormone health.
But basically, we undergo puberty
when there's enough food and there's enough body fat
that the body fat sends a signal to the brain called leptin,
that's a hormone that comes from body fat,
signals to the brain to turn on puberty.
That's puberty, but even as adults,
for women that are menstruating,
there needs to be sufficient leptin signaling to the brain
in order to maintain ovulation
because of the way that the brain communicates
with the pituitary and the ovaries.
Similarly, for men,
fasting or extreme exercise plus fasting,
we now know reduces testosterone.
Its impacts are not exactly clear.
However, if you reduce food intake,
either in total calories or in duration too much,
you will suffer a drop in sperm counts, fertility will drop.
And this makes sense.
The body is communicating to the brain
whether or not conditions are sufficient in the body
to reproduce and to presumably and hopefully support
the health and wellbeing of those offspring.
So there's a logical link between body fat and eating
and how much food is available to you
and how long it's available to you
and the signals in the brain
that allow for reproductive success.
There are some data that pointed differences
in the effects of intermittent fasting
for males versus females.
Those data right now only come from mice.
That study was published by Sachin Panda recently.
We still await the studies in humans.
Some people do not do well on intermittent fasting,
either in terms of mood or hormone health.
And so everyone needs to determine for themselves
whether or not having a time-restricted feeding window
is good for them,
how long that time-restricted feeding window should be.
I think eight hours is kind of a nice minimum to adhere to
based on everything that we've covered today.
And for some people,
time-restricted feeding is not going to be compatible
with hormone health for them.
For them, eating more meals spread throughout the day,
presumably smaller meals, same caloric intake,
is going to be more beneficial for their hormones.
This is something that is going to be individual
and is going to have to be determined
on an individual basis.
However, if you're going to try time-restricted feeding,
I do want to remind you that taking a period of three to seven
or ideally 10 days to transition into it,
not just going flipping from eating to three meals a day
that span from 6 a.m. to 10 p.m.
and suddenly going to an eight-hour feeding window,
but rather winnowing down that feeding window
about an hour or so per day
is going to allow the hormone systems of your body,
including leptin, the hypocretin-erexin system,
which are systems within the body that signal to the brain
that food is about to come,
allowing those systems to adjust
so that you're not overwhelmingly hungry, irritable,
and you're not throwing your whole hormone system
out of whack.
I keep coming back to this eight-hour feeding window
and I want to provide a little more basis for it
and just to encourage that it's not completely arbitrary.
The lengthy review that I mentioned earlier
features a number of studies
that have used this eight-hour feeding window.
But there's a particular study that I'd like to highlight,
mainly because I don't expect people to delve
into the full reference list of the other review.
And this is a study that was carried out
between Sachin Panda's lab and Christopher Verity's lab.
So this is a collaboration.
The study was carried out in humans
and is entitled effects of eight-hour time-restricted feeding
on body weight and metabolic disease risk factors
in obese adults, excuse me.
And this study essentially showed,
I'll just read the conclusions,
that an eight-hour time-restricted feeding
produces a mild caloric restriction and weight loss
without calorie counting.
So that's key, right?
These people aren't calorie counting.
Somehow just by adhering to an eight-hour window,
they are taking in fewer calories than they're burning off
and clinically it reduced blood pressure.
So I mentioned the study,
not because there aren't many others
involving the eight-hour feeding window, also in humans,
but because the eight-hour feeding window has been tested
in obese adults and non-obese adults.
And there are even a few studies in children.
So this eight-hour window seems to be
a really good rule of thumb and a kind of anchor
around which we can each think about
incorporating time-restricted feeding.
There are, of course, other patterns of feeding.
And while some people have engaged in longer fasts
of 24 hours, 36 hours, or more,
alternate day fasting, meaning eating one day,
not eating the next day, or in some cases eating one day
and eating very few calories,
500 or 600 calories the next day, has been tested.
A few studies have also looked at eating
a sort of maintenance level of calories for five days
and then taking two days and fasting clear through
or eating very few calories, 300 or 500 calories.
In fact, there's a sort of a community online
of people that are exploring longer fasts
for sake of trying to offset dementia
or reverse effects of dementia.
Thus far, at least in my awareness,
there isn't any quality clinical peer-reviewed study
on that yet for sake of dementia.
Although I await those studies
and if anyone's aware of them,
please send me a link in the comments.
But alternate day fasting has gotten
the so-called safe bill of health.
This has been written up,
meaning that people didn't suffer bone loss.
They didn't suffer any major detrimental effects.
It does seem that it can create significant weight loss
and can help with obese individuals,
that it can reduce resting blood glucose.
And every other day fasting, in many cases,
can produce more rapid effects on weight loss
and reductions in blood glucose than time-restricted feeding.
However, every other day type fasting,
for most people, is not going to be feasible.
They're just not going to be able to do that
for a long period of time.
And what hasn't really been done is the follow-up,
to see whether or not people who do every other day fasting
or five days of eating followed by two days of fasting,
whether or not that leads to a rebound in weight gain,
whether or not that leads to a rebound
in blood glucose, et cetera.
So for now, the eight-hour feeding window
and time-restricted feeding seems to be the most tested,
supported in animal studies and in human studies,
and the one around which I think most people should orient
if they're considering getting into time-restricted feeding.
It's also sort of hard to imagine how one could include
a significant exercise schedule or work schedule
on every other day fasting.
Remember, in any study, people are often being compensated,
or at least are incentivized in some way
to adhere to the study.
This is one of the major issues that I have with any study
that says that three or four different diets
are essentially equal in terms of their ability
to produce weight loss.
Adherence is very different in the outside world,
where you don't have a researcher monitoring you,
where you're not logging all your food.
Most people don't do that consistently.
And we can take a little bit of a neuroscience perspective
on this to try and arrive at what the best kind
of organization of an eating plan, or if we wanted
to call it a diet, we could, would be for you.
Many people find it easier to just not eat
for certain periods of each 24-hour cycle
than to eat smaller portions.
Portion control is very hard for some people.
For other people, it's manageable.
But people like me, I don't eat half the croissant.
I don't think it's a real thing.
It's not available to me, I should say.
Now, of course I could eat just half a croissant.
But I noticed that when I eat the croissant,
because they're so delicious,
that it creates a rise in blood glucose,
a rise in the other hormones and chemicals
that are associated with ingesting delicious,
highly palatable food.
And it's actually a lot of work for me
to just eat half the croissant.
There's something that's much more thoroughly satisfying
about eating the entire croissant.
And actually, there's something that's somewhat satisfying
about not eating the croissant at all,
and just knowing that later I can eat the whole croissant.
Now that's me.
Other people find that they don't have any trouble
with portion control.
That for them, just eating small bits of food
throughout the day is what sets them
in the right psychological and physical state
for sake of work, et cetera.
And I mentioned work and mental focus
because one of the aspects of fasting
that have drawn a lot of people
to time-restricted feeding and fasting
is the clarity of mind that people get
when, first of all, they don't have to think about
when they're going to eat
because they know when their eating window begins.
They also don't have to think about regulating
their behavior because they already know
when they're going to eat and when they're not going to eat.
Whereas when you're restricting portions,
you actually have to make decisions all the while.
You know, and I think I, like many people decide,
well, you know, is that exactly half
or could I have like another rung on the croissant,
this kind of thing.
I don't negotiate with food.
That's why I like a time-restricted feeding window.
I know I'm going to eat for, in my case,
I use a 10-hour feeding window or so.
And I'll eat the whole croissant.
I just don't have to think about it.
Now, the food choices that you make
inside of that feeding window are of course
also going to be very important.
Certain foods will increase blood glucose
such that you're going to get hungrier and hungrier.
Others will maintain lower blood glucose
and will allow you to be more controlled
in the foods that you pursue.
Those are all individual considerations
that are deserving of their own entire episode.
But I do want to point out that the advantage
of time-restricted feeding is that it involves
a lot of the decision-making in the brain,
the so-called go, no-go circuitries of our basal ganglia,
if you want to know those areas that control them.
Anytime we have to restrict a behavior,
that's called a no-go.
Anytime we engage in a behavior, that's a go.
No-go behaviors require a lot of what's called
top-down control, and it's very metabolically demanding.
And so time-restricted feeding allows you to depart
from the whole no-go, go negotiation
that you have to undergo when you have to restrict portions.
And so I think this is a reason why many people
have gravitated towards time-restricted feeding
and why for people that don't want to have to think
about all that, it's just very straightforward.
One of the more hot button issues out there
is whether or not given equal amounts of caloric intake
and equal amounts of activity
and equal amounts of nutrients, et cetera,
whether or not restricting food to a particular window
biases more weight loss toward fat loss
versus loss of other tissues.
Because of course, when we lose weight,
we can lose that from any number of different
storage sites within the body, muscle, water,
glycogen, or fat.
Now, this is such a hot button issue
that I almost don't want to get into it,
but I'm going to get into it anyway,
because there are data that are very interesting.
This is covered in the review that I mentioned earlier
that describes how if people follow
a time-restricted feeding schedule for long periods of time,
so 60 days or longer, there are some metabolic changes
in the way that people metabolize energy
that do seem to shift the system toward more fat loss
relative to burning of other tissues
when in a state of caloric restriction.
And I want to say when in a state of caloric restriction,
because there's really no way to cheat the system.
There's no way that you can ingest far more calories
than you burn or excrete.
When I say excrete, you know, I certainly don't suggest this,
but there, you know, bulimics and other people
that have eating disorders will use laxatives
as a way to eliminate food quickly from their system
so it can't be converted into fat or other forms of energy.
That's a very, in that case, it's a pathological situation,
but in general, calories in versus calories out,
as I mentioned earlier, is this kind of foundational element
but in states of caloric restriction,
meaning sub-maintenance intake,
time restricted feeding does seem to bias
more of the energy burned to compensate
for that deficit from fat.
And the way it accomplishes it is very interesting.
It turns out that it drives more fat loss
by way of increasing a hepatic lipase.
This is something called LIPC,
hepatic means of the liver and lipase,
which anytime you hear ASE is means it's an enzyme.
So it seems to increase hepatic lipase.
So it increases the enzyme that metabolizes fat
for lipolysis and energy production
and reduces something called CIDEC, C-I-D-E-C,
which is a lipid droplet associated and lipolysis inhibitor.
Now that's a mouthful, no pun intended,
but what CIDEC really is,
this lipid droplet associated molecule
is it can inhibit lipolysis.
So extended periods of time restricted feeding,
meaning eight hour feeding window or 10 hour feeding window
that's obeyed for several months or more
seems to allow the system to shift toward burning more fat
or rather using a higher percentage of fat
when in a caloric deficit.
Now, I doubt that this is going to resolve
the truly barbed wire,
almost hairball ridiculous online debates
about whether or not time restricted feeding
is better than another feeding schedule.
Look, I don't think any particular feeding schedule
is holy.
If you are sub caloric,
meaning fewer calories burned than calories ingested,
you're going to lose weight.
But the data seemed to point to the fact
that if you do time restricted feeding
for a fairly long duration of time,
and you maintain that,
that you are increasing these lipases
that increase lipolysis, energy use from fat,
and you're decreasing the lipid droplet
associated lipolysis inhibitors.
So it's both a,
you're removing the break and you're pressing
on the accelerator of fat loss.
I think that this logically points to a case
in which using time restricted feeding
with a sub caloric intake seems to be,
at least to my mind,
the most scientifically supported way
to ensure that a significant portion of the weight
that one loses is from body fat stores.
Any discussion about fasting would be incomplete
without a discussion about what does
and does not break a fast.
However, there is no black and white answer
to that question.
And you should immediately understand why.
It's because eating and not eating
are not equivalent to fed and fasted.
It depends on when you ate,
how much you ate and where you are in your circadian cycle.
We can actually arrive at a simple answer
to whether or not something breaks the fast or not.
Now, the technical way to go about this,
would be to wear a continuous glucose monitor
and to ingest little bits of food of different kinds
or large amounts of food of different kinds
and measure blood glucose,
because ultimately blood glucose is the readout
of whether or not your system is in a fed or fasted state.
There are other parameters too, of course,
but that's the dominant one.
In so far as the scientific literature says,
drinking water will not break your fast.
Drinking tea will not break your fast.
Drinking coffee provided it is black coffee
will not break your fast.
Ingesting caffeine in pill form will not break your fast.
There are other things that won't break your fast.
For instance, eating one peanut
when deep in a fasted state will not break your fast.
Eating a whole handful of peanuts
might not even break your fast
if you are in a very low glucose state.
However, if you just finished a meal
that included carbohydrates
or it was a very large meal of any kind an hour ago,
yes, indeed, eating one peanut could break your fast.
So it's all contextual.
That's what's really important to understand.
Unless you're going to wear a continuous glucose monitor
and unless you're going to wear a continuous glucose monitor
and set an absolute numerical threshold
for what it is to break your fast,
I think there are some simple rules that we can follow.
First of all, anything that involves sugar,
in particular, simple sugars
can potentially break your fast.
And there's actually a study on this
which shows that if people ingest even one,
one gram of sugar post dinner,
if they had a full meal for dinner,
that can actually disrupt the expression
of some of the circadian genes related to fasting
and to sleep and sleep-related fasting.
Now that's pretty extreme.
It's almost kind of scary to think about,
but that's how sensitive our system is
if we already have somewhat elevated blood glucose
from a meal that we ate an hour or so ago.
Whereas if we have run for an hour
or trained hard high-intensity training
and we haven't quite reached the beginning
of our so-called feeding window,
will eating a small amount of food take us out of that fast?
Well, depends on what the food is.
If it's mostly fat, probably not.
A number of people out there nowadays
talk about so-called fat fasting.
Fat fasting is a way to kind of wriggle past
the stringency of either eating or not eating
as a black and white rule for feeding window
versus non-feeding window.
So some people will ingest medium chain triglycerides,
so-called MCTs, or people will ingest fats only
until their official feeding window begins.
So these are sort of how the negotiations
that people carry out tend to go.
But fat, of course, won't increase blood glucose
and insulin as much as carbohydrates will.
Protein will have sort of an intermediate effect.
And as I mentioned earlier,
ingesting carbohydrates with some fat
will tend to blunt the rise in glucose
and will extend the duration over which glucose is released.
So we really can't say food X
or beverage X breaks a fast.
However, at the extremes, we can say that.
For instance, if you drink a can of soda pop,
unless you just ran an ultra marathon,
you're breaking your fast, okay?
Eat a piece of pizza, you're breaking your fast.
If you eat purely fats, maybe, probably not.
If you've been fasting for five hours or more,
strictly fasting for five hours or more.
So you can start to see where there's a lot of wiggle room
and it's very contextual.
And this is why any posts that you see
or any information that you see that something does
or does not break your fast that doesn't place it
in the context of when the last time you ate
and what you ate and your activity
and your time within the circadian clock schedule
of 24 hours, it's a sort of meaningless discussion.
So in general, I think what's really useful
if you're not going to wear a continuous glucose monitor
is to try and be fairly strict
about when you initiate your feeding window
and when you stop your feeding window.
And as time evolves and you establish a more regular routine
of eating certain kinds of foods and not others
that are right for you,
because as I've emphasized before on this podcast
and I will continue to emphasize,
keto works great for some people,
vegetarian keto works great for some people,
carnivore diet works great for other people.
Some people are omnivores, some people are carnivores,
some people are vegan.
All of that is great and fine by me.
Everyone has to establish what's right for them.
Today, we've really bypassed the discussion
about foods of a particular origin or type,
animal-based or plant-based,
but all the same rules apply within this thing
that we're call intermittent fasting
or time-restricted feeding.
So what breaks a fast will depend and what you want to eat
or what you are willing to eat,
that's a totally separate manner from when you eat.
But as we've established, when you eat is vitally important.
Some of you are probably wondering whether or not
artificial sweeteners or non-artificial plant-based
sweeteners like stevia break a fast.
This will vary somewhat.
And I have to say the data on this are somewhat mixed.
There is evidence that when people ingest
artificial sweeteners,
that it can create a transient increase in blood glucose
followed by a transient decrease in blood glucose
below baseline.
This is thought to explain the increase in hunger
caused by ingestion of things like aspartame and sucralose
and things of that sort.
There are not a lot of good studies
exploring the plant-based non sugar sweeteners,
things like stevia, even things like monk fruit,
which is a separate category into itself.
There aren't a lot of studies on this.
I think most people need to establish this for themselves.
The best way of course,
would be to wear a continuous glucose monitor
to go into a fasted state of either one hour or two hours,
or maybe you've been fasting all night
and then ingest stevia in whatever form you want
or coffee in whatever form you want with sucralose
or aspartame, et cetera,
setting aside the discussion about the effects
of these things on the gut microbiome,
which is a different topic entirely.
I think it's fair to say that in moderation,
the plant-based non sugar sweeteners like stevia
in particular stevia seem to have a minimal impact
on overall blood glucose
when considered over a fairly large time bin.
Aspartame and sucralose, saccharin,
I think we can say more or less the same,
but as soon as you get into a discussion about those,
you also have to get into a discussion
about some of the evidence published in nature
and other excellent journals now,
pointing to the fact that when consumed in excess,
not when consumed in moderation,
but when consumed in excess,
that those might have some detrimental effects
on the gut microbiome.
So do artificial sweeteners break a fast?
Depends on the amount, depends on the type.
And in general, I think you're probably okay,
provided that you're not indulging in them too often.
However, some people,
just by virtue of tasting something sweet,
feel a spike in their appetite that makes it harder
for them to adhere to the feeding window.
And so this is why you can imagine
that a really well controlled study on this
would be very hard to carry out.
And I'm not really sure that it's worth our tax dollars
to actually design and carry out a study like that,
because there would be so much individual variation
in terms of discipline in adhering to the feeding window,
whether or not people experience increases
and drops in blood glucose, how that impacts them,
whether or not they're exercising,
it just becomes an infinite variable space, as we say,
in experimental science.
So you really have to determine that for you.
But I don't think that we can fairly say
that artificial sweeteners break a fast.
I think that would be incorrect to say.
Earlier, we were talking about glucose disposal agents,
both behavioral and compound based,
things like metformin and berberine.
And in fact, cinnamon is even a mild glucose disposal agent.
It can actually reduce blood glucose.
Lemon and lime juice, believe it or not,
can lower blood glucose.
You may have experienced this before
of eating something very, very sweet
and almost feeling kind of overwhelmed
and kind of poisoned by how sweet it is,
especially if you're not accustomed
to eating a lot of sugary things.
One quick remedy for that is actually a half lime
or a half lemon squeezed into juice and drinking that
just by virtue of the taste and by virtue of the fact
that it will reduce blood glucose,
you'll notice that that effect
almost immediately disappears.
That's not magic.
That's the effects of acidity on blood glucose levels.
So there are a number of things
that can adjust blood glucose.
They're not necessarily disposal agents.
They're not sweeping it out of the bloodstream
in the same way that berberine or metformin would,
or that high intensity exercise
at the appropriate times of day would.
But there is one particular thing that one can ingest
that can help manage psychologically and performance wise
through the fasting portion of the intermittent fasting
and get you to your feeding window.
And that's salt.
I've talked a little bit about this on the podcast before,
but because neurons use salt, sodium and potassium
and magnesium, the so-called electrolytes
in order to perform their magic
of chemical and electrical signaling,
everything you do depends on chemical
and electrical signaling and all that chemical
and electrical signaling requires electrolytes
in some form or another.
Neurons run on the passage of ions like sodium
in and out of their cell membranes,
or I should say across their cell membranes to be accurate.
Many people find that the kind of lightheadedness,
the shakiness that's accustomed
with having slightly low blood sugar can be offset
by taking a half teaspoon or so of sea salt,
or even just a tiny pinch of salt
and putting into some water and drinking it.
Some people find because of the glucose lowering effects
of acidity that if they're feeling kind of shaky
and not well, and they put some lemon juice into water
and drink that it drops their blood glucose further.
So there's a common practice nowadays
that's discussed on the internet of waking up,
drinking some water with some lime or lemon juice in it
with a little pinch of salt.
I think that little pinch of salt is a good idea.
What is it doing?
How is it offsetting all this?
Well, saltwater actually has a mild effect
as a glucose disposal agent,
but it has a stabilizing effect on blood volume.
And so because sodium brings with it water
and the so-called osmolarity of your blood and your body
depends on the salt levels in your blood
and brain and body.
Many people find that if they're feeling shaky,
they're feeling lightheaded, they can't concentrate.
They think they need sugar or food,
but what will actually remedy that is some salt.
And I know a number of people
that have incorporated this practice
and have written to me and saying, oh, you know,
if I just take a little bit of salt and some water,
they may or may not include the lemon or lime juice.
They immediately feel better
and find that it's actually quite straightforward
to get out to that,
to wait until the feeding window kicks in.
This is especially true for people that are using caffeine
because when you ingest caffeine,
you actually excrete a lot of water,
has a diuretic effect.
And with that water goes salt.
So it actually causes you to excrete sodium.
Now, the role of sodium in blood pressure
and hypertension is, you know, quite controversial.
Science Magazine,
one of the premier scientific journals out there
had a special issue all about salt some years ago,
talking about the research around hypertension.
Indeed people with chronic hypertension
or high blood pressure,
or very high blood pressure in particular,
should be wary of ingesting too much sodium.
But for most people,
ingesting sodium provided they drink enough water
and they don't have chronic hypertension
or high blood pressure is actually beneficial.
That doesn't mean you should be drinking seawater,
doesn't mean you should be overindulging in salt,
but many people find that they can manage
their mental and physical state
and even feel really terrific, real clarity of mind,
and really enjoy their fast
when they're ingesting sufficient salt.
And all it requires really is a small pinch of salt,
ideally Himalayan or sea salt,
if you want to get fancy about it,
but table salt would be fine.
And just drinking that in some water,
maybe with lemon or lime juice
to offset the taste a little bit,
can really stabilize one's jitters
and can stabilize the mind.
And you might also notice can offset that churning
and yearning and appetite
where you can't imagine going another five minutes
before eating something,
suddenly you feel okay.
And that has to do with a lot of the effects of blood volume
caused by ingesting salt in the appropriate amounts.
In other words, sometimes you think you need food,
but what you really need is salt
and salt can make you feel better immediately.
I'd like to mention two excellent zero cost resources.
If you're going to explore time restricted feeding,
or maybe if you already are doing time restricted feeding,
I have no affiliation to either of these.
The first is the website that I mentioned before,
My Circadian Clock,
which is the website hosted by Sachin Panda and colleagues.
There are a lot of resources there
where you can log your food intake,
get information about time restricted feeding,
all the science, the ongoing studies, et cetera.
The other is the so-called zero app
that makes it very easy to mark
when you're beginning your feeding window
and when you're ending your feeding window.
And in so doing,
marking when you are beginning your fast
and ending your fast,
or at least initiating the beginning of the unfed state,
as we could more accurately call it.
It's a terrific app.
I've used it from time to time.
I don't tend to use it in an ongoing basis
because I'm just sort of used to eating
at a particular time of day now.
But anytime I've shifted that window,
for instance, a few weeks ago,
I started moving that protein intake
and my entire feeding window earlier in the day.
And because that takes some attention on my part,
because I'm not used to doing that,
I've been using the zero app and I like it quite a lot.
It logs your progress and it gives you averages
and you can see how many other people are fasting.
Again, totally zero cost.
I actually don't know who owns that app,
but I think they've done an excellent job.
The interface is really terrific.
And as far as I know, it's available for Apple and Android,
but it's at least available for Apple phones,
which is the type of phone I happen to have.
So check those out.
My circadian clock, you just put that into Google,
you'll find it.
And the zero app, both excellent zero cost resources.
In a moment, I'd like to review the parameters
of a ideal feeding schedule for you
and give you the variables that you can plug in
to your lifestyle and your preferences.
There are a couple of things that I would place
into the category of frequently asked,
somewhat odd, but still worthy of discussion.
For instance, people have asked,
will brushing your teeth with toothpaste break your fast?
I think unless you're swallowing the toothpaste, no.
Now, if you really want to run out
and get a continuous glucose monitor and brush your teeth,
then you can evaluate that.
But no, people have asked,
will a half glass of wine after dinner,
a couple hours after dinner, break your fast?
Absolutely, it absolutely will.
And it's been demonstrated to do that
based on the one gram of sugar,
kind of eerie or scary effect that I talked about before.
Scary and eerie because it just seems like one gram of sugar.
How could it do that?
But these are metabolic processes
and they are very sensitive post meal.
A few months back,
I did an experiment wearing a continuous glucose monitor.
And I got a surprise when I discovered
that going into a sauna increases my blood glucose
quite a bit, it actually spikes it as high as a meal.
And then it tends to drop back down to baseline
or even slightly below baseline afterwards.
When I talk to people about this, somebody said,
oh, it's got to be that the continuous glucose monitor
was getting disrupted by the heat in the sauna.
That's actually not the case.
Turns out that when you go in a sauna,
because you dehydrate, you're losing water.
I wasn't drinking water and you're dropping a lot of water.
The concentration of sugar in your blood actually goes up.
And I actually put these data out
in a social media post on Twitter
and people were kind of shocked to see
how much a sauna can spike your blood glucose.
Now I do practice time restricted feeding,
intermittent fasting.
I'm not super strict about it.
I use a kind of eight to 10 hour ish window
either early in the day or late in the day.
I saw this effect of the sauna.
Personally, the psychological and physical health effects
of the sauna are valuable enough to me
that I continue to use it.
I just not concerned about this increase in blood glucose
to the extent that I'm going to eliminate sauna.
I like to use the sauna three or four times a week
before sleep.
So I'll use it an hour or two before sleep.
And yes, indeed, it creates this big spike in blood glucose
that then drops based on change
in the concentration of blood sugar.
I'm just not going to worry about it.
Now, if you're concerned about blood glucose spikes,
then you might be worried about it.
But in my case, it was one of those things
where it was interesting
and it was worthy of discussion, I thought,
because it was somewhat surprising to me,
although it makes perfect sense why this would be the case.
But at the end of the day, literally,
it just makes sense for me to get in the sauna.
Okay, so now you've heard a lot of science.
You've heard a lot of examples, even a few anecdotes,
and let's come up with the ideal intermittent fasting
AKA time-restricted feeding schedule for you.
And when I say ideal, I mean,
what are the variables that are negotiable?
What are the ones that are non-negotiable?
What is ideal for you will depend on the context
of your life and what you are willing to do consistently.
So first of all, we established,
based on the discussion with Sachin,
who is truly the premier world expert in this area,
who knows the animal and human scientific literature
better than anybody, has written this incredible review
and for whom I consulted,
that you do not want to ingest food for at least,
I want to emphasize, at least 60 minutes post waking up.
Second, you want to avoid ingesting any food of any kind,
even one gram of sugar.
Remember, this is the ideal.
One gram of sugar even would be too much.
For the two to three hours prior to bedtime.
He also mentioned,
ideally you are spending eight hours in bed.
I didn't tell you that earlier, I saved that for now,
but ideally you are sleeping that entire eight hours,
but simply by being in bed for that eight hours
and avoiding food after waking for an hour
and before bed for two to three hours,
you're starting to build out the duration
of this fasted period.
Remember that the sleep related fasting
is particularly important for the health benefits
of time restricted feeding.
Again, the sleep related fasting is especially important
because of all the cellular repair processes
that occur in the liver, in the gut, in the microbiome,
in the brain, all over the body.
And because of the way that that coordinates
the expression of the clock genes
that are then going to wick out
and have many other positive effects on health,
including weight and fat loss.
But in addition to that, liver health, et cetera.
An eight hour feeding window as a target
seems to be the best target feeding window,
at least by my read of the literature
and in discussing it with such in.
Shorter feeding windows of four to six hours
tend to lead to overeating
and potentially increases in weight.
One meal per day type eating do not seem to do that,
but those are special cases in that most people
can't adhere to a one meal per day type schedule,
at least not on a regular basis.
And it's not very compatible with most social schedules.
Although some people may be able to adhere to that
in a straightforward way,
but there aren't any robust studies exploring
the advantages of one meal per day.
So if you feel there are advantages of one meal per day
for you, as opposed to an eight hour feeding window,
well then by all means, use a one meal per day approach
or use a four to six hour feeding window
and just make sure you don't overeat in that window.
Remember that most people tend to not adhere
to the eight hour feeding window.
They say eight hours,
but they tend to eat outside of the eight hours
a little bit on each side.
So if your goal is a 10 hour feeding window,
you might want to set it to nine hours or eight hours.
If your goal is six hours,
you might want to set it to seven or eight hours.
And this is simply based, or I shouldn't say simply,
this is based on thousands, if not tens of thousands
of human subject data points
that Sachin and colleagues have collected.
Regular placement of the eating window
or feeding window every 24 hours is important.
You don't have to be absolutely rigid
and neurotic about this,
but you don't want it sliding around on the weekend
so that it's starting two hours later
and ending two hours later a couple of days a week,
because then you start to offset
many of the positive health effects
that have been demonstrated for time restricted feeding.
Remember if you eat your food
within a certain feeding window,
but that feeding window shifts by a couple hours,
it is effectively like jet lagging your system.
It is effectively like traveling a couple of time zones over
eating there for a few days and coming back
when in fact you're not traveling.
And that's because of the way that food
adjusts the circadian clock genes.
Now you can offset some of that through the use of light.
And I've talked extensively about how to use light
in previous podcasts, but again,
early morning and all day bright light exposure
as safely as you can, ideally from sunlight,
not through a window, et cetera,
avoiding bright light in the middle of the night,
extremely important for mood,
offsetting metabolic dysfunction, et cetera.
Not incidentally, Sachin's early work
was he was one of the three co-discoverers
of the cells in the eye,
the so-called melanopsin cells
that set the central circadian clock.
So he was a pioneer in that field,
which led him to be a pioneer in this field and so on.
But when should that eight hour window
be placed within each 24 hour cycle?
Well, let's talk about ideal.
Ideal, if you really want to maximize
all the health benefits of time restricted feeding,
you need to extend the fast around sleep on both sides.
You would place it smack dab in the middle of the day.
It would be a schedule in which you started eating,
for instance, at 10 AM and you stopped eating at 6 PM,
an absolutely dreadful schedule for anyone
that wants to have some semblance of a normal life.
In my opinion,
it's not really compatible with most schedules,
although some people might be able to do it.
Maybe you and your family or your friends,
you're eating a late breakfast
and then you're having a late-ish lunch around 2 PM
and then you have dinner at six.
And then assuming that you go to bed around 9.30 or 10 PM,
that is going to extract the maximum amount
of weight related, body fat related,
metabolic factor related aspects of time restricted feeding.
Some people tend to fall into a category
where they do best placing that feeding window
later in the day and provided it doesn't run
too close to your sleep.
Remember you need a two or three hour buffer
before your sleep, where you're not ingesting anything.
That's in order to extract the benefits
of time restricted feeding.
Well, then starting your feeding window at 12 PM
and ending at 8 PM plus or minus half an hour or so,
day-to-day seems like a perfectly reasonable schedule
for some people starting at 2 PM and ending at 10 PM
will be that schedule.
Of course, you have to take into consideration
when you exercise, if you exercise.
For instance, I like to exercise early in the day,
if I run or if I do some moderate or light intensity
exercise, regardless of what type of exercise it is,
I have no trouble waiting until my feeding window kicks in
around noon or even 2 PM.
But if I do high intensity weight training, for instance,
early in the day, or if I run sprints
and I do that at 7 AM or 8 AM by 11 AM,
I am very, very hungry and it's hard for me
to do other things, concentrate, et cetera.
Now I'm not neurotic about my feeding window.
As I mentioned before,
I kind of let it expand and contract a bit
around the eight hour mark and feel perfectly free
to do that too.
We're talking here in ideals, not in necessarily practicals,
but other people find that they're very hungry
when they wake up early in the day.
If you're one of these people or you're somebody
who really is trying to emphasize hypertrophy
or maintenance of muscle,
then it does seem that ingesting protein early in the day
is beneficial, that it can be more readily converted
into muscle tissue.
And this has been demonstrated in at least one study.
There's another study underway
that's exploring this further.
For people that are really, really interested
in hypertrophy and building muscle,
well then time restricted feeding
is usually not the way they go.
I mean, let's be honest.
There are many people out there who are eating
four or more meals per day.
And they're doing that from 7 AM until 8 PM.
I realized that not everybody is overweight.
There is an obesity crisis indeed.
The percentage of obesity
and non-alcoholic fatty liver disease
is just cosmic through the roof,
at least in this country and in other countries as well.
This country, me in the US, but other countries as well.
But there are of course,
people that are trying to gain weight
who don't want to lose weight
or who are trying to maximize physical performance
or hypertrophy or things of that sort.
And so of course, time restricted feeding for them
might be as long as I'm awake, I'm eating.
And I tip my hat to those people and just say,
provided you understand what you're doing
and the burden that that places
on some of the other processes in your body,
if that's right for you, then by all means pursue that.
Another thing that we can add to this summary
or key points related to time restricted feeding
is the use of glucose disposal agents and or behaviors.
If you find that you've eaten too close to a period of time
in which you would prefer to be fasting,
that's when a 30 minute brisk walk
or even modest walk after eating can be beneficial.
Ingesting some lemon juice or lime juice
can help lower blood glucose somewhat.
And then there are the things like metformin and berberine.
There are even some supplements out there
that combine things like berberine, cinnamon,
which can lower blood glucose and things like chromium
and things that have a mild effect on blood glucose,
but berberine and metformin are very high potency,
glucose disposal agents.
And I mentioned earlier,
why you would want to approach those
with the appropriate level of caution
and figure out the dosages for you.
And for some people,
the dosages will be zero milligrams is going to be ideal.
And then of course we discussed how making sure
that you're ingesting enough fluids
in particular water and salt,
especially if you're using caffeine
in order to increase your levels of alertness,
regardless of where that caffeine source comes from coffee,
tea, or otherwise that can cause the excretion of sodium
and can lead to a kind of shakiness,
a lightheadedness and the feelings of hunger
that may or may not be related to blood glucose.
Some people genuinely need to eat.
I certainly would not want to see people getting
hypoglycemic to the point where it's dangerous.
Certainly if you are diabetic,
and in fact, for all people,
you should consult with your physician
when exploring any major changes to diet
or additions or subtractions of anything,
including supplementation.
But for most people,
maintaining relatively low to modest blood glucose levels
is going to be pretty healthy
and will allow all the positive effects
of intermittent fasting to occur.
And when you find that reaching that start
to the feeding window is challenging,
that ingesting sodium can often stabilize your system
mentally and physically,
and allow you to reach that window often painlessly.
And then as a final point, as I mentioned earlier,
provided that they are consumed in low,
no or modest amounts,
artificial sweeteners or plant-based non-sugar,
non caloric sweeteners,
don't seem to really impact blood glucose
to the extent that it would quote unquote,
take you out of your fast.
But that like fat fasting is something
that's going to be highly individual
and that you're going to have to experiment with
for yourself.
And being able to recognize when you're in a fast
and when you're out of a fast at a subjective level
and not constantly having to measure your blood glucose
or do things of that sort can be beneficial.
And I think if you watch for the feelings associated
with eating and post-eating foods of different kinds
in different amounts,
and you watch for the feelings associated with being fasted
for long periods of time or short periods of time
of having gotten sufficient sunlight,
of having trained hard or not trained hard
earlier that day, et cetera,
you can do the most important thing,
which is to start to learn to evaluate your own system,
to run simple, safe experiments on your system
in a way that allows you to really establish
the ideal nutrition schedule for you,
whether it be time restricted feeding,
AKA intermittent fasting or some other nutritional plan.
If you're learning from and or enjoying this podcast,
please subscribe to our YouTube channel.
That really helps us.
In addition,
please feel free to leave us comments about this episode
or other episodes.
If you want to make suggestions about future episode guests
or episode topics,
please do that in the comment section as well.
Please also subscribe to the podcast on Apple and Spotify
and on Apple, you can leave us up to a five star review.
In addition,
if you're not already following Huberman Lab on Instagram,
there I do brief posts about science
that often are not covered on the podcast.
So that's Huberman Lab on Instagram.
We're also on Twitter, also at Huberman Lab.
Recently, we launched a clips channel, Huberman Lab Clips.
Please check out our clips channel and subscribe there
for brief excerpts from the various Huberman Lab podcasts.
In addition,
please check out our sponsors that we mentioned
at the beginning of this episode.
That's a terrific way to support the podcast.
We also have a Patreon,
it's patreon.com slash Andrew Huberman,
and there you can support the podcast
at any level that you like.
During this episode and in many other previous episodes,
I discussed supplements.
One issue with supplements
and the supplement industry as a whole
is that the quality and amounts of supplements
often varies tremendously.
Therefore we've partnered with Thorne, T-H-O-R-N-E,
because Thorne has the absolute highest levels of stringency
with respect to the quality of ingredients
and the amount of the ingredients
matching what's on the label.
If you want to see what I take
and get 20% off any of Thorne's supplements,
you can go to thorne.com slash the letter U slash Huberman.
You'll see the list of supplements that I take.
You can get 20% off those.
And if you enter the Thorne site through that portal,
you get 20% off anything that Thorne makes.
I know we covered a lot of information today.
I hope you learned a lot about time-restricted feeding.
I hope you learned a lot about metabolism
and energy and health
and how when you eat is as important as what you eat.
And last, but certainly not least,
thank you for your interest in science.
And I'll see you in the next one.